THE STRANGER ALS O BY ALBERT CAMU S 
Awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1957 
Notebooks I 942-1951 (Carnets, 
janvier 1942-mars 1951) I965 
Notebooks 1935-1942 (Carnets, 
mai 1935-{evrier 1942) I963 
Resistance, Rebellion, and Death (Actuelles 
-a selection) I 96 I 
The Possessed (Les Possedes) I 96o 
Caligula and Three Other Plays (Caligula, 
Le Malentendu, L'Etat de siege, 
Les Justes) I 958 
Exile and the Kingdom (L'E:xil 
etleRoyaume) I958 
The Fall (La Chute) I 957 
The Myth of Sisyphus (Le Mythe de Sisyphe) 
and Other Essays I955 
The Rebel (L'Homme Revolte) I954 
The Plague (La Peste) I948 
The Stranger (L'Etranger) I 946 THE 
STRANGER 
ALBERT CAMU S 
Translated from the French 
by Matthew Ward 
VINTAGE INTERNATI ONAL 
VINTAGE BOOKS 
A DIVISION OF RANDOM HOUSE, INC. 
NEW YORK + 
FIRST VINTAGE iNTERNATIONAL EDITION, MARCH 1989 
Copyright© 1988 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. 
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American 
Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States by 
Random House, Inc., New York. Originally published in 
French as r: Etrarzger by Librairie Gallimard, France, in 1942. 
Copyright 1942 by Librairie Gallimard. Copyright renewed 
1969 by Mme Veuve Albert Camus. This translation origi­
nally published, in hardcover, by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., in 
1988. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Camus, Albert, 1913-1960. 
The Stranger. 
(Vintage international) 
Translation of: L:etranger. 
I. Ward, Matthew. II. Title. 
PQ2605.A3734E813 1989 843'.914 88-40378 
ISBN 0-679-72020-0 (pbk.) 
Manufactured in the United States of America TRAN SLATO� S NOTE 
The Stranger demanded of Camus the creation of a style 
at once literary and profoundly popular, an artistic 
sleight of hand that would make the complexities of a 
man's life appear simple. Despite appearances, though, 
neither Camus nor Meursault ever tried to make things 
simple for themselves. Indeed, in the mind of a moralist, 
simplification is tantamount to immorality, and Meursault 
and Camus are each moralists in their own way. What 
little Meursault says or feels or does resonates with all he 
does not say, all he does not feel, all he does not do. The 
"simplicity" of the text is merely apparent and every­
where paradoxical. 
Camus acknowl edged employing an "American 
method" in writing The Stranger, in the first half of the 
book in particular: the short, precise sentences; the 
depiction of a character ostensibly without consciousness; 
and, in places, the "tough guy" tone. Heming way, Dos 
Passos, Faulkner, Cain, and others had pointed the way. 
There is some irony then in the fact that for forty years 
the only translation available to American audiences 
should be Stuart Gilbert's "Britannic" rendering. His 
v 0 TRANSLATO R'S NOTE 0 
is the version we have all read, the version I read as a 
schoolboy in the boondocks some twenty years ago. As 
all translators do, Gilbert gave the novel a consistency 
and voice all his own. A certain paraphrastic earnestness 
might be a way of describing his effort to make the text 
intelligible, to help the English-speaking reader under­
stand what Camus meant. In addition to giving the text 
a more "American" quality, I have also attempted to 
venture farther into the letter of Camus's novel, to 
capture what he said and how he said it, not what he 
meant. In theory, the latter should take care of itself. 
When Meursault meets old Salamano and his dog in 
the dark stairwell of their apartment house, Meursault 
observes, "Il etait avec son chien." \iVith the re8ex of a 
well-bred Englishm an, Gilbert restores the conventional 
relation between man and beast and gives additional 
adverbial information: "As usual, he had his dog with 
him." But I have taken Meursault at his word: "He was 
with his dog."-in the way one is with a spouse or a 
friend. A sentence as straightf orward as this gives us the 
world through Meursault's eyes. As he says toward the 
end of his story, as he sees things, Salamano's dog was 
worth just as much as Salamano's wife. Such peculiarities 
of perception, such psychological increments of character 
are Meursault. It is by pursuing what is unconventional 
in Camus's writing that one approaches a degree of its 
still startling originality. 
In the second half of the novel Camus gives freer 
rein to a lyricism which is his alone as he takes Meursault, 
now stripped of his liberty, beyond sensation to enforced 
vi 0 TRANS LATOR 'S NOTE 0 
memory, unsatisfied desire and, finally, to a kind of 
understanding. In this stylistic difference between the 
two parts, as everywhere, an impossible fidelity has been 
my purpose. 
No sentence in French literature in English trans­
lation is better known than the opening sentence of The 
Stranger. It has become a sacred cow of sorts, and I have 
changed it. In his notebooks Camus recorded the obser­
vation that "the curious feeling the son has for his mother 
constitutes all his sensibility." And Sartre, in his "Ex­
plication de L'Etmnger," goes out of his way to point out 
Meursault's use of the child's word "Maman" when 
speaking of his mother. To use the more removed, adult 
"Mother" is, I believe, to change the nature of Meursault's 
curious feeling for her. It is to change his very sensibility. 
As Richard Howard pointed out in his classic state­
ment on retranslation in his prefatory note to The Im­
moralist, time reveals all translation to be paraphrase. All 
translations date; certain works do not. Knowing this, 
and with a certain nostalgia, I bow in Stuart Gilbert's 
direction and ask, as Camus once did, for indulgence and 
understanding from the reader of this first American 
translation of The Stranger, which I affectionately dedi­
cate to Karel Wahrsager. 
The special circumstances under which this transla­
tion was completed require that I thank my editor at 
Knopf, Judith Jones, for years of patience and faith. 
Nancy Festinger and Melissa Weissberg also deserve my 
gratitude. 
vii PART ONE 1 
Maman died today. Or yesterday maybe, I don't know. 
I got a telegram from the home: "Mother deceased . 
Funeral tomorrow. Faithfully yours." That doesn't mean 
anything. Maybe it was yesterday. 
The old people's home is at Marengo, about eighty 
kilometers from Algiers, I'll take the two o'clock bus and 
get there in the afternoon. That way I can be there for the 
vigil and come back tomorrow night. I asked my boss for 
two days off and there was no way he was going to re­
fuse me with an excuse like that. But he wasn't too 
happy about it. I even said, "It's not my fault." He didn't 
say anything. Then I thought I shouldn't have said that. 
After all, I didn't have anything to apologize for. He's 
the one who should have offered his condolences. But he 
probably will day af ter tomorrow, when he sees I'm in 
mourni ng. For now, it's almost as if Maman weren't dead. 
After the funeral, though, the case will be closed, and 
everything will have a more official feel to it. 
I caught the two o'clock bus. It was very hot. I ate 
at the restaurant, at Celeste's, as usual. Everybody felt 
very sorry for me, and Celeste said, "You only have one 
3 0 THE STRANGER o 
mother." When I left, they walked me to the door. I 
was a little distracted because I still had to go up to 
Emmanuel's place to borrow a black tie and an arm band. 
He lost his uncle a few months back. 
I ran so as not to miss the bus. It was probably be­
cause of all the rushing around, and on top of that the 
bumpy ride, the smell of gasoline, and the glare of the 
sky and the road, that I dozed off. I slept almost 
the whole way. And when I woke up, I was slumped 
against a soldier who smiled at me and asked if I'd been 
traveling long. I said, "Yes," just so I wouldn't have to 
say anything else. 
The home is two kilometers from the village. I walked 
them. I wanted to see Maman right away. But the care­
taker told me I had to see the director first. He was busy, 
so I waited awhile. The caretaker talked the whole time 
and then I saw the director. I was shown into his office. 
He was a little old man with the ribbon of the Legion 
of Honor in his lapel. He looked at me with his clear 
eyes. Then he shook my hand and held it so long I 
didn't know how to get it loose. He thumbed through 
a file and said, "Madame Meursault came to us three 
years ago. You were her sole support." I thought he was 
criticizing me for something and I started to explain. 
But he cut me off. "You don't have to justify yourself, 
my dear boy. I've read your mother's file. You weren't 
able to provide for her properly. She needed someone to 
look after her. You earn only a modest salary. And the 
truth of the matter is, she was happier here." I said, 
4 o THE STRANGER 0 
"Yes, sir." He added, "You see, she had friends here, 
people her own age. She was able to share things from 
the old days with them. You're young, and it must have 
been hard for her with you." 
It was true. When she was at home with me, Maman 
used to spend her time following me with her eyes, not 
saying a thing. For the first few days she was at the home 
she cried a lot. But that was because she wasn't used to 
it. A few months later and she would have cried if she'd 
been taken out. She was used to it. That's partly why I 
didn't go there much this past year. And also because it 
took up my Sunday-not to mention the trouble of 
getting to the bus, buying tickets, and spending two hours 
traveling. 
The director spoke to me again. But I wasn't really 
listening anymore. Then he said, "I suppose you'd like 
to see your mother." I got up without saying anything 
and he led the way to the door. On the way downstairs, he 
explained, "We've moved her to our little mortuary. So 
as not to upset the others. Whenever one of the residents 
dies, the others are a bit on edge for the next two or 
three days. And that makes it difficult to care for them." 
We crossed a courtyard where there were lots of old 
people chatting in little groups. As we went by, the talk­
ing would stop. And then the conversation would start 
up again behind us. The sound was like the muffied 
jabber of parakeets. The director stopped at the door of 
a small building. ''I'll leave you now, Monsieur Meur­
sault. If you need me for anything, I'll be in my office. 
5 0 THE STRANGER 0 
As is usually the case, the funeral is set for ten o'clock in 
the morning. This way you'll be able to keep vigil over 
the departed. One last thing: it seems your mother 
often expressed to her friends her desire for a religious 
burial. I've taken the liberty of making the necessar y 
arrangements. But I wanted to let you know." I thanked 
him. While not an atheist, Maman had never in her life 
given a thought to religion. 
I went in. It was a very bright, whitewashed room 
with a skylight for a roof. The furniture consisted of 
some chairs and some cross-shaped sawhorses. Two of 
them, in the middle of the room, were supporting a 
closed casket. All you could see were some shiny screws, 
not screwed down all the way, standing out against the 
walnut-stained planks. Near the casket was an Arab 
nurse in a white smock, with a brightly colored scarf on 
her head. 
Just then the caretaker came in behind me. He must 
have been running. He stuttered a little. "We put the 
cover on, but I'm supposed to unscrew the casket so you 
can see her." He was moving toward the casket when I 
stopped him. He said, "You don't want to?" I answered, 
"No." He was quiet, and I was embarrassed because I 
felt I shouldn't have said that. He looked at me and then 
asked, "Why not?" but without criticizing, as if he just 
wanted to know. I said, "I don't know." He started twirl­
ing his moustache, and then without looking at me, again 
he said, "I understand." He had nice pale blue eyes and 
a reddish complexi on. He offered me a chair and then 
6 0 THE STRANGER 0 
sat down right behind me. The nurse stood up and went 
toward the door. At that point the caretaker said to me, 
"She's got an abscess." I didn't understand , so I looked 
over at the nurse and saw that she had a bandage 
wrapped around her head just below the eyes. Where 
her nose should have been, the bandage was Bat. All 
you could see of her face was the whiteness of the ban­
dage. 
When she'd gone, the caretaker said, ''I'll leave you 
alone." I don't know what kind of gesture I made, but 
he stayed where he was, behind me. Having this presence 
breathing down my neck was starting to annoy me. The 
room was filled with beautiful late-afternoon sunlight. 
Two hornets were buzzing against the glass roof. I 
could feel myself getting sleepy. Without turning around, 
I said to the caretaker, "Have you been here long?" 
Right away he answered, "Five years"-as if he'd been 
waiting all along for me to ask. 
After that he did a lot of talking. He would have been 
very surprised if anyone had told him he would end up 
caretaker at the Marengo home. He was sixty-four and 
came from Paris. At that point I interrupted him. "Oh, 
you're not from around here?" Then I remembered that 
before taking me to the director's office, he had talked 
to me about Maman. He'd told me that they had to 
bury her quickly, because it gets hot in the plains, espe­
cially in this part of the country. That was when he told 
me he had lived in Paris and that he had found it hard 
to forget it. In Paris they keep vigil over the body for 
7 0 THE STRANG ER 0 
three, sometimes four days. But here you barely have 
time to get used to the idea before you have to start 
running after the hearse. Then his wife had said to him, 
"Hush now, that's not the sort of thing to be telling the 
gentlem an." The old man had blushed and apologized. 
I'd stepped in and said, "No, not at all." I thought what 
he'd been saying was interesting and made sense. 
In the little mortuary he told me that he'd come to 
the horne because he was destitute. He was in good 
health, so he'd offered to take on the job of caretaker. I 
pointed out that even so he was still a resident. He said 
no, he wasn't. I'd already been struck by the way he 
had of saying "they" or "the others" and, less often, "the 
old people," talking about the patients, when some of 
them weren't any older than he was. But of course it 
wasn't the same. He was the caretaker, and to a certain 
extent he had authority over them. 
Just then the nurse carne in. Night had fallen sud­
denly. Darkness had gathered, quickly, above the sky­
light. The caretaker turned the switch and I was blinded 
by the sudden Bash of light. He suggested I go to the 
dining hall for dinner. But I wasn't hungry. Then he 
offered to bring me a cup of coffee with milk. I like milk 
in my coffee, so I said yes, and he carne back a few 
minutes later with a tray. I drank the coffee. Then I felt 
like having a smoke. But I hesitated, because I didn't 
know if I could do it with Marnan right there. I thought 
about it; it didn't matter. I offered the caretaker a ciga­
rette and we smoked. 
8 0 THE STRANGER 0 
At one point he said, "You know, your mother's 
friends will be coming to keep vigil too. It's customary. 
I have to go get some chairs and some black coffee." I 
asked him if he could tum off one of the lights. The 
glare on the white walls was making me drowsy. He said 
he couldn't. That was how they'd been wired: it was all 
or nothing. I didn't pay too much attention to him after 
that. He left, came back, set up some chairs. On one of 
them he stacked some cups around a coffee pot. Then 
he sat down across from me, on the other side of Maman. 
The nurse was on that side of the room too, but with' 
her back to me. I couldn't see what she was doing. But 
the way her arms were moving made me think she was 
knitting. It was pleasant; the coffee had warmed me 
up, and the smell of Rowers on the night air was coming 
through the open door. I think I dozed off for a while. 
It was a rustling sound that woke me up. Because 
I'd had my eyes closed, the whiteness of the room seemed 
even brighter than before. There wasn't a shadow any­
where in front of me, and every object, every angle and 
curve stood out so sharply it made my eyes hurt. That's 
when Maman's friends came in. There were about ten 
in all, and they Boated into the blinding light without a 
sound. They sat down without a single chair creaking. I 
saw them more clearly than I had ever seen anyone, and 
not one detail of their faces or their clothes escaped me. 
But I couldn't hear them, and it was hard for me to be­
lieve they really existed. Almost all the women were 
wearing aprons, and the strings, which were tied tight 
9 0 THE STRANG ER 0 
around their waists, made their bulging stomachs stick 
out even more. I'd never noticed what huge stomachs 
old women can have. Almost all the men were skinny 
and carried canes. What struck me most about their 
faces was that I couldn't see their eyes, just a faint 
glimmer in a nest of wrinkles. When they'd sat down, 
most of them looked at me and nodded awkwardly, their 
lips sucked in by their toothless mouths, so that I couldn't 
tell if they were greeting me or if it was just a nervous 
tic. I think they were greeting me. It was then that I 
realized they were all sitting across from me, nodding 
their heads, grouped around the caretaker. For a second 
I had the ridiculous feeling that they were there to judge 
me. 
Soon one of the women started crying. She was in 
the second row, hidden behind one of her companions, 
and I couldn't see her very well. She was crying softly, 
steadily, in little sobs. I thought she'd never stop. The 
others seemed not to hear her. They sat there hunched 
up, gloomy and silent. They would look at the casket, 
or their canes, or whatever else, but that was all they 
would look at. The woman kept on crying. It surprised 
me, because I didn't know who she was. I wished I 
didn't have to listen to her anymore. But I didn't dare 
say anything. The caretaker leaned over and said some­
thing to her, but she shook her head, mumbled some­
thing, and went on crying as much as before. Then the 
caretaker came around to my side. He sat down next to 
me. After a long pause he explained, without looking at 
10 o THE STRANGER 0 
me, "She was very close to your mother. She says your 
mother was her only friend and now she hasn't got any-
" one. 
We just sat there like that for quite a while. The 
woman's sighs and sobs were quieting down. She sniffled 
a lot. Then finally she shut up. I didn't feel drowsy 
anymore, but I was tired and my back was hurting me. 
Now it was all these people not making a sound that 
was getting on my nerves. Except that every now and 
then I'd hear a strange noise and I couldn't figure out 
what it was. Finally I realized that some of the old 
people were sucking at the insides of their cheeks and 
making these weird smacking noises. They were so lost 
in their thoughts that they weren't even aware of it. I 
even had the impression that the dead woman lying in 
front of them didn't mean anything to them. But I think 
now that that was a false impression. 
We all had some coffee, served by the caretaker. 
After that I don't know any more. The night passed. I 
remember opening my eyes at one point and seeing that 
all the old people were slumped over asleep, except for one 
old man, with his chin resting on the back of his hands 
wrapped around his cane, who was staring at me as if he 
were just waiting for me to wake up. Then I dozed off 
again. I woke up because my back was hurting more 
and more. Dawn was creeping up over the skylight. Soon 
afterwards, one of the old men woke up and coughed a 
lot. He kept hacking into a large checkered handker­
chief, and every cough was like a convulsion. He woke 
I I 0 THE STR ANGER o 
the others up, and the caretaker told them that they 
ought to be going. They got up. The uncomfortable 
vigil had left their faces ashen looking. On their way 
out, and much to my surprise, they all shook my hand­
as if that night during which we hadn't exchanged as 
much as a single word had somehow brought us closer 
together. 
I was tired. The caretaker took me to his room and 
I was able to clean up a little. I had some more coffee 
and milk, which was very good. When I went outside, 
the sun was up. Above the hills that separate Marengo 
from the sea, the sky was streaked with red. And the 
wind coming over the hills brought the smell of salt 
with it. It was going to be a beautiful day. It had been 
a long time since I'd been out in the country, and I 
could feel how much I'd enjoy going for a walk if it 
hadn't been for Maman. 
But I waited in the courtyard, under a plane tree. I 
breathed in the smell of fresh earth and I wasn't sleepy 
anymore. I thought of the other guys at the office. They'd 
be getting up to go to work about this time: for me that 
was always the most difficult time of day. I thought about 
those things a little more, but I was distracted by the 
sound of a bell ringing inside the buildings. There was 
some commotion behind the windows, then everything 
quieted down again. The sun was now a little higher in 
the sky: it was starting to warm my feet. The caretaker 
came across the courtyard and told me that the director 
was asking for me. I went to his office. He had me sign 
12 0 THE ST RANGE R 0 
a number of documents. I noticed that he was dressed 
in black with pin-striped trousers. He picked up the 
telephone and turned to me. "The undertaker's men 
arrived a few minutes ago. I'm going to ask them to seal 
the casket. Before I do, would you like to see your 
mother one last time?" I said no. He gave the order into 
the telephone, lowering his voice: "Figeac, tell the men 
they can go ahead." 
After that he told me he would be attending the 
funeral and I thanked him. He sat down behind his desk 
and crossed his short legs. He informed me that he and 
I would be the only ones there, apart from the nurse on 
duty. The residents usually weren't allowed to attend 
funerals. He only let them keep the vigil. "It's more 
humane that way," he remarked. But in this case he'd 
given one of mother's old friends- Thomas Perez­
permission to join the funeral processi on. At that the 
director smiled. He said, "I'm sure you underst and. It's 
a rather childish sentiment. But he and your mother were 
almost inseparable. The others used to tease them and 
say, 'Perez has a fiancee.' He'd laugh. They enjoyed it. 
And the truth is he's taking Madame Meursault's death 
very hard. I didn't think I could rightfully refuse him 
permission. But on the advice of our visiting physician, 
I did not allow him to keep the vigil last night." 
We didn't say anything for quite a long time. The 
director stood up and looked out the window of his office. 
A moment later he said, "Here's the priest from Marengo 
already. He's early." He warned me that it would take at 0 THE STRANGER 0 
least three-quarters of an hour to walk to the church, 
which is in the village itself. We went downstairs. Out 
in front of the building stood the priest and two altar 
boys. One of them was holding a censer, and the priest 
was leaning toward him, adjusting the length of its silver 
chain. As we approached, the priest straightened up. He 
called me "my son" and said a few words to me. He went 
inside; I followed. 
I noticed right away that the screws on the casket 
had been tightened and that there were four men wear­
ing black in the room. The director \vas telling me that the 
hearse was waiting out in the road and at the same time 
I could hear the priest beginning his prayers. From then 
on everything happened very quickly. The men moved 
toward the casket with a pall. The priest, his acolytes, the 
director and I all went outside. A woman I didn't know 
was standing by the door. "Monsieur Meursault," the 
director said. I didn't catch the woman's name; I just 
understood that she was the nurse assigned by the home. 
Without smiling she lowered her long, gaunt face. Then 
we stepped aside to make way for the body. We fol­
lowed the pall bearers and left the horne. Outside the 
gate stood the hearse. Varnished, glossy, and oblong, it 
reminded me of a pencil box. Next to it was the funeral 
director, a little man in a ridiculous getup, and an awk­
ward, embarrassed-looking old man. I realized that it was 
Monsieur Perez. He was wearing a soft felt hat with a 
round crown and a wide brim (he took it off as the 
casket was coming through the gate), a suit with trousers 0 THE ST RANGE R 0 
that were corkscrewed down around his ankles, and a 
black tie with a knot that was too small for the big white 
collar of his shirt. His lips were trembling below a nose 
dotted with blackheads. Strange, floppy, thick-rimmed 
ears stuck out through his fine, white hair, and I was 
struck by their blood-red color next to the pallor of his 
face. The funeral director assigned us our places. First 
came the priest, then the hearse. Flanking it, the four 
men. Behind it, the director and myself and, bringing up 
the rear, the nurse and Monsieur Perez. 
The sky was already filled with light. The sun was 
beginning to bear down on the earth and it was getting 
hotter by the minute. I don't know why we waited so 
long before getting under way. I was hot in my dark 
clothes. The little old man, who had put his hat back on, 
took it off again. I turned a little in his direction and 
was looking at him when the director started talking to 
me about him. He told me that my mother and Monsieur 
Perez often used to walk down to the village together in 
the evenings, accompanied by a nurse. I was looking at 
the countryside around me. Seeing the rows of cypress 
trees leading up to the hills next to the sky, and the 
houses standing out here and there against that red 
and green earth, I was able to understand Maman better. 
Evenings in that part of the country must have been a 
kind of sad relief. But today, with the sun bearing down, 
making the whole landscape shimmer with heat, it was in­
human and oppressive. 
We got under way. It was then that I noticed that 
15 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
Perez had a slight limp. Little by little, the hearse was 
picking up speed and the old man was losing ground. 
One of the men Banking the hearse had also dropped 
back and was now even with me. I was surprised at 
how fast the sun was climbing in the sky. I noticed that 
for quite some time the countryside had been buzzing 
with the sound of insects and the crackling of grass. The 
sweat was pouring down my face. I wasn't wearing a 
hat, so I fanned myself with my handkerchief. The man 
from the undertaker's said something to me then which 
I missed. He was lifting the edge of his cap with his 
right hand and wiping his head with a handkerchief 
with his left at the same time. I said, "What?" He pointed 
up at the sky and repeated, "Pretty hot." I said, "Yes." 
A minute later he asked, "Is that your mother in there?" 
Again I said, "Yes." "Was she old?" I answered, "Fairly," 
because I didn't know the exact number. After that he 
was quiet. I turned around and saw old Perez about fifty 
meters behind us. He was going as fast as he could, swing­
ing his felt hat at the end of his arm. I looked at the 
director, too. He was walking with great dignity, without 
a single wasted motion. A few beads of sweat were form­
ing on his forehead, but he didn't wipe them off. 
The procession seemed to me to be moving a little 
faster. All around me there was still the same glowing 
countryside Hooded with sunlight. The glare from the 
sky was unbearable. At one point, we went over a section 
of the road that had just been repaved. The tar had 
burst open in the sun. Our feet sank into it, leaving its 
r6 0 THE STRA NGER 0 
shiny pulp exposed. Sticking up above the top of the 
hearse, the coachman's hard leather hat looked as if it 
had been molded out of the same black mud. I felt a 
little lost between the blue and white of the sky and the 
monotony of the colors around me-the sticky black of 
the tar, the dull black of all the clothes, and the shiny 
black of the hearse. All of it-the sun, the smell of leather 
and horse dung from the hearse, the smell of varnish and 
incense, and my fatigue after a night without sleep-was 
making it hard for me to see or think straight. I turned 
around again: Perez seemed to be way back there, fading 
in the shimmering heat. Then I lost sight of him alto­
gether. I looked around and saw that he'd left the road 
and cut out across the fields. I also noticed there was a 
bend in the road up ahead. I realized that Perez, who 
knew the country, was taking a short cut in order to catch 
up with us. By the time we rounded the bend, he was 
back with us. Then we lost him again. He set off cross 
country once more, and so it went on. I could feel the 
blood pounding in my temples. 
After that, everything seemed to happen so fast, so 
deliberately, so naturally that I don't remember any of 
it anymore. Except for one thing: as we entered the 
village, the nurse spoke to me. She had a remarkable 
voice which didn't go with her face at all, a melodious, 
quavering voice. She said, "If you go slowly, you risk 
getting sunstroke. But if you go too fast, you work up 
a sweat and then catch a chill inside the church." She 
was right. There was no way out. Several other images o THE STRANGE R 0 
from that day have stuck in my mind: for instance, 
Perez's face when he caught up with us for the last time, 
just outside the village. Big tears of frustration and ex­
haustion were streaming down his cheeks. But because 
of all the wrinkles, they weren't dripping off. They 
spread out and ran together again, leaving a watery film 
over his ruined face. Then there was the church and 
the villagers on the sidewalks, the red geraniums on the 
graves in the cemetery, Perez fainting (he crumpled like 
a rag doll), the blood-red earth spilling over Maman's 
casket, the white flesh of the roots mixed in with it, more 
people, voices, the village, waiting in front of a cafe, the 
incessant drone of the motor, and my joy when the bus 
entered the nest of lights that was Algiers and I knew I 
was going to go to bed and sleep for twelve hours. 
rB 2 
As I was waking up, it came to me why my boss had 
seemed annoyed when I asked him for two days off: 
today is Saturday. I'd sort of forgotten, but as I was 
getting up, it came to me. And, naturally, my boss 
thought about the fact that I'd be getting four days' 
vacation that way, including Sunday, and he couldn't 
have been happy about that. But, in the first place, it 
isn't my fault if they buried Maman yesterday instead 
of today, and second, I would have had Saturday and 
Sunday off anyway. Obviously, that still doesn't keep me 
from understanding my boss's point of view. 
I had a hard time getting up, because I was tired 
from the day before. While I was shaving, I wondered 
what I was going to do and I decided to go for a swim. I 
caught the streetcar to go to the public beach down at 
the harbor. Once there, I dove into the channel. There 
were lots of young people. In the water I ran into Marie 
Cardona, a former typist in our office whom I'd had a 
thing for at the time. She did too, I think. But she'd left 
soon afterwards and we didn't have the time. I helped 
her onto a Hoat and as I did, I brushed against her breasts. o THE ST RANGE R v 
I was still in the water when she was already lying flat 
on her stomach on the float. She turned toward me. Her 
hair was in her eyes and she was laughing. I hoisted 
myself up next to her. It was nice, and, sort of joking 
around, I let my head fall back and rest on her stomach . 
She didn't say anything so I left it there. I had the whole 
sky in my eyes and it was blue and gold. On the back 
of my neck I could feel Marie's heart beating softly. We 
lay on the Boat for a long time, half asleep. When the 
sun got too hot, she dove off and I followed. I caught 
up with her, put my arm around her waist, and we 
swam together. She laughed the whole time. On the 
dock, while we were drying ourselves off, she said, ''I'm 
darker than you." I asked her if she wanted to go to 
the movies that evening. She laughed again and told me 
there was a Fernandel movie she'd like to see. Once we 
were dressed, she seemed very surprised to see I was 
wearing a black tie and she asked me if I was in mourn­
ing. I told her Maman had died. She wanted to know 
how long ago, so I said, "Yesterday." She gave a little 
start but didn't say anything. I felt like telling her it 
wasn't my fault, but I stopped myself because I re­
membered that I'd already said that to my boss. It didn't 
mean anything. Besides, you always feel a little guilty. 
By that evening Marie had forgotten all about it. The 
movie was funny in parts, but otherwise it was just too 
stupid. She had her leg pressed against mine. I was 
fondling her breasts. Toward the end of the show, I gave 
her a kiss, but not a good one. She came back to my place. 
20 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
When I woke up, Marie had gone. She'd explained 
to me that she had to go to her aunt's. I remembered that 
it was Sunday, and that bothered me: I don't like Sun­
days. So I rolled over, tried to find the salty smell Marie's 
hair had left on the pillow, and slept until ten. Then I 
smoked a few cigarettes, still in bed, till noon. I didn't 
feel like having lunch at Celeste's like I usually did be­
cause they'd be sure to ask questions and I don't like 
that. I fixed myself some eggs and ate them out of the 
pan, without bread because I didn't have any left and 
I didn't feel like going downstairs to buy some. 
After lunch I was a little bored and I wandered 
around the apartment. It was just the right size when 
Maman was here. Now it's too big for me, and I've had 
to move the dining room table into my bedroom . I live in 
just one room now, with some saggy straw chairs, a ward­
robe whose mirror has gone yellow, a dressing table, and 
a brass bed. I've let the rest go. A little later, just for 
something to do, I picked up an old newspaper and read 
it. I cut out an advertisement for Kruschen Salts and 
stuck it in an old notebook where I put things from the 
papers that interest me. I also washed my hands, and 
then I went out onto the balcony. 
My room looks out over the main street in the neigh­
borhood . It was a beautiful afternoon . Yet the pavement 
was wet and slippery, and what few people there were 
were in a hurry. First, it was families out for a walk: two 
little boys in sailor suits, with trousers below the knees, 
looking a little cramped in their stiff clothes, and a little 
21 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
girl with a big pink bow and black patent-leather shoes. 
Behind them, an enormous mother, in a brown silk 
dress, and the father, a rather frail little man I know by 
sight. He had on a straw hat and a bow tie and was 
carrying a walking stick. Seeing him with his wife, I 
understood why people in the neighborhood said he was 
distinguished. A little later the local boys went by, hair 
greased back, red ties, tight-fitting jackets, wi�h em­
broidered pocket handkerchief s and square-toed shoes. I 
thought they must be heading to the movies in town. 
That was why they were leaving so early and hurrying 
toward the streetcar, laughing loudly. 
After them, the street slowly emptied out. The 
matinees had all started, I guess. The only ones left were 
the shopkeepers and the cats. The sky was clear but dull 
above the fig trees lining the street. On the sidewalk 
across the way the tobacconist brought out a chair, set 
it in front of his door, and straddled it, resting his arms 
on the back. The streetcars, packed a few minutes before, 
were almost empty. In the little cafe Chez Pierrot, next 
door to the tobacconist's, the waiter was sweeping up the 
sawdust in the deserted restaurant inside. It was Sunday 
all right. 
I turned my chair around and set it down like the 
tobacconist's because I found that it was more comfortable 
that way. I smoked a couple of cigarettes, went inside to 
get a piece of chocolate, and went back to the window to 
eat it. Soon after that, the sky grew dark and I thought 
we were in for a summer storm. Gradually, though, it 
22 0 THE STRANGE R o 
cleared up again. But the passing clouds had left a hint 
of rain hanging over the street, which made it look 
darker. I sat there for a long time and watched the sky. 
At five o'clock some streetcars pulled up, clanging 
away. They were bringing back gangs of fans from the 
local soccer stadium. They were crowded onto the run­
ning boards and hanging from the handrails. The street­
cars that followed brought back the players, whom I 
recognized by their little athletic bags. They were shout­
ing and singing at the tops of their lungs that their team 
would never die. Several of them waved to me. One of 
them even yelled up to me, "We beat 'em!" And I 
nodded, as if to say "Yes." From then on there was a 
steady stream of cars. 
The sky changed again. Above the rooftops the sky 
had taken on a reddish glow, and with evening coming 
on the streets came to life. People were straggling back 
from their walks. I recognized the distinguished little 
man among the others. Children were either crying or 
lagging behind. Almost all at once moviegoers spilled 
out of the neighbo rhood theaters into the street. The 
young men among them were gesturing more excitedly 
than usual and I thought they must have seen an ad­
venture film. The ones who had gone to the movies in 
town came back a little later. They looked more serious. 
They were still laughing, but only now and then, and 
they seemed tired and dreamy. But they hung around 
anyway, walking up and down the sidewalk across the 
street. The local girls, bareheaded, were walking arm in 
23 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
arm. The young men had made sure they would have 
to bump right into them and then they would make 
cracks. The girls giggled and turned their heads away. 
Several of the girls, whom I knew, waved to me. 
Then the street lamps came on all of a sudden and 
made the first stars appearing in the night sky grow dim. 
I felt my eyes getting tired from watching the street 
filled with so many people and lights. The street lamps 
were making the pavement glisten, and the light from 
the streetcars would glint off someone's shiny hair, or off 
a smile or a silver bracelet. Soon afterwards, with the 
streetcars running less often and the sky already blue 
above the trees and the lamps, the neighborhood emptied 
out, almost imperceptibly, until the first cat slowly made 
its way across the now deserted street. Then I thought 
maybe I ought to have some dinner.' My neck was a little 
stiff from resting my chin on the back of the chair for 
so long. I went downstairs to buy some bread and spa­
ghetti, did my cooking, and ate standing up. I wanted to 
smoke a cigarette at the window, but the air was getting 
colder and I felt a little chilled. I shut my windows , and 
as I was coming back I glanced at the mirror and saw a 
corner of my table with my alcohol lamp next to some 
pieces of bread. It occurred to me that anyway one more 
Sunday was over, that Maman was buried now, that I 
was going back to work, and that, really, nothing had 
changed. 3 
I worked hard at the office today. The boss was nice. He 
asked me if I wasn't too tired and he also wanted to 
know Maman's age. I said, "About sixty," so as not to 
make a mistake; and I don't know why, but he seemed 
to be relieved somehow and to consider the matter 
closed. 
There was a stack of freight invoices that had piled 
up on my desk, and I had to go through them all. Before 
leaving the office to go to lunch, I washed my hands. I 
really like doing this at lunchtime. I don't enjoy it so 
much in the evening, because the roller towel you use 
is soaked through : one towel has to last all day. I men­
tioned it once to my boss. He told me he was sorry but 
it was really a minor detail. I left a little late, at half past 
twelve, with Emmanuel, who works as a dispatcher. The 
office overlooks the sea, and we took a minute to watch 
the freighters in the harbor, which was ablaze with sun­
light. Then a truck came toward us with its chains 
rattling and its engine backfiring. Emmanuel said, "How 
'bout it?" and I started running. The truck passed us and 
we ran after it. I was eng ulfed by the noise and the dust. 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
I couldn't see anything, and all I was conscious of was 
the sensation of hurtling forward in a mad dash through 
cranes and winches, masts bobbing on the horizon and 
the hulls of ships alongside us as we ran. I was first to 
grab hold and take a Hying leap. Then I reached out 
and helped Emmanuel scramble up. We were out of 
breath; the truck was bumping around on the uneven 
cobblestones of the quay in a cloud of dust and sun. 
Emmanuel was laughing so hard he could hardly breathe. 
We arrived at Celeste's dripping with sweat. Celeste 
was there, as always, with his big belly, his apron, and his 
white moustache. He asked me if things were "all right 
now." I told him yes they were and said I was hungry. I 
ate fast and had some coffee. Then I went home and 
slept for a while because I'd drunk too much wine, and 
when I woke up I felt like having a smoke. It was late 
and I ran to catch a streetcar. I worked all afternoon. It 
got very hot in the office, and that evening, when I 
left, I was glad to walk back slowly along the docks. The 
sky was green; I felt good. But I went straight home 
because I wanted to boil myself some potatoes. 
On my way upstairs, in the dark, I ran into old 
Salamano, my neighbor across the landing. He was with 
his dog. The two of them have been inseparable for 
eight years. The spaniel has a skin disease-mange, I 
think-which makes almost all its hair fall out and 
leaves it covered with brown sores and scabs. After 
living together for so long, the two of them alone in one 
tiny room, they've ended up looking like each other. Old 
26 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
Salamano has reddish scabs on his face and wispy yellow 
hair. As for the dog, he's sort of taken on his master's 
stooped look, muzzle down, neck straining. They look as 
if they belong to the same species, and yet they hate each 
other. Twice a day, at eleven and six, the old man takes 
the dog out for a walk. They haven't changed their route 
in eight years. You can see them in the rue de Lyon, the 
dog pulling the man along until old Salamano stumbles. 
Then he beats the dog and swears at it. The dog cowers 
and trails behind. Then it's the old man who pulls the 
dog. Once the dog has forgotten, it starts dragging its 
master along again, and again gets beaten and sworn at. 
Then they both stand there on the sidewalk and stare at 
each other, the dog in terror, the man in hatred. It's the 
same thing every day. When the dog wants to urinate, 
the old man won't give him enough time and yanks at 
him, so that the spaniel leaves behind a trail of little 
drops. If the dog has an accident in the room, it gets 
beaten again. This has been going on for eight years. 
Celeste is always saying, "It's pitiful," but really, who's 
to say? When I ran into him on the stairs, Salamano was 
swearing away at the dog. He was saying, "Filthy, stink­
ing bastard!" and the dog was whimpering. I said "Good 
evening," but the old man just went on cursing. So I 
asked him what the dog had done. He didn't answer. 
All he said was "Filthy, stinking bastard!" I could barely 
see him leaning over his dog, trying to fix something on 
its collar. I spoke louder. Then, without turning around, 
he answered with a kind of suppressed rage, "He's always o THE STRANGE R o 
there." Then he left, yanking at the animal, which was 
letting itself be dragged along, whimpering. 
Just then my other neighbor carne in. The word 
around the neighborhood is that he lives off women. But 
when you ask him what he does, he's a "warehous e 
guard." Generally speaking, he's not very popular. But 
he often talks to me and sometimes stops by my place for 
a minute, because I listen to him. I find what he.has to 
say interesting. Besides, I don't have any reason not to 
talk to him. His name is Raymond Sintes. He's a little 
on the short side, with broad shoulders and a nose like 
a boxer's. He always dresses very sharp. And once he 
said to me, talking about Salarnano, "If that isn't pitiful!" 
He asked me didn't I think it was disgusting and I said 
no. 
We went upstairs and I was about to leave him when 
he said, "I've got some blood sausage and some wine at 
my place. How about joining me?" I figured it would save 
me the trouble of having to cook for myself, so I ac­
cepted. He has only one room too, and a little kitchen 
with no window. Over his bed he has a pink-and-white 
plaster angel, some pictures of famous athletes, and 
two or three photographs of naked women. The room 
was dirty and the bed was unmade. First he lit his 
paraffin lamp, then he took a pretty dubious -looking 
bandage out of his pocket and wrapped it around his 
right hand. I asked him what he'd done to it. He said 
he'd been in a fight with some guy who was trying to 
start trouble. 0 THE STRANGER 0 
"You see, Monsieur Meursault," he said, "it's not that 
I'm a bad guy, butl have a short fuse. This guy says to 
me, 'If you're man enough you'll get down off that 
streetcar.' I said, 'C'mon, take it easy.' Then he said, 
'You're yellow.' So I got off and I said to him, 'I think 
you better stop right there or I'm gonna have to teach 
you a lesson.' And he said, 'You and who else?' So I 
let him have it. He went down. I was about to help him 
up but he started kicking me from there on the ground. 
So I kneed him one and slugged him a couple of times. 
His face was all bloody. I asked him if he'd had enough. 
He said, 'Yes.' " All this time, Sintes was fiddling with 
his bandage. I was sitting on the bed. He said, "So you 
see, I wasn't the one who started it. He was asking for 
it." It was true and I agreed. Then he told me that as a 
matter of fact he wanted to ask my advice about the 
whole business, because I was a man, I knew about 
things, I could help him out, and then we'd be pals. I 
didn't say anything, and he asked me again if I wanted 
to be pals. I said it was fine with me: he seemed pleased. 
He got out the blood sausage, fried it up, and set out 
glasses, plates, knives and forks, and two bottles of wine. 
All this in silence. Then we sat down. As we ate, he 
started telling me his story. He '>vas a little hesitant at 
first. "I knew this lady ... as a matter of fact, well, she 
was my mistress ." The man he'd had the fight with was 
this woman's brother. He told me he'd been keeping 
her. I didn't say anything, and yet right away he added 
that he knew what people around the neighborhood 
29 o THE STRANGER 0 
were saying, but that his conscience was clear and that 
he was a warehouse guard. 
'To get back to what I was saying," he continued, 
"I realized that she was cheating on me." He'd been 
giving her just enough to live on. He paid the rent on 
her room and gave her twenty francs a day for food. 
"Three hundred francs for the room, six hundred for 
food, a pair of stockings every now and then-th at made 
it a thousand francs. And Her Highness refused to work. 
But she was always telling me that things were too tight, 
that she couldn't get by on what I was giving her. And 
I'd say to her, 'Why not work half-days? You'd be helping 
me out on all the little extras. I bought you a new outfit 
just this month, I give you twenty francs a day, I pay 
your rent, and what do you do? ... You have coffee in 
the afternoons with your friends. You even provide the 
coffee and sugar. And me, I provide the money. I've been 
good to you, and this is how you repay me.' But she 
wouldn't work; she just kept on telling me she couldn't 
make ends meet-and that's what made me realize she 
was cheating on me." 
Then he told me that he'd found a lottery ticket in 
her purse and she hadn't been able to explain how she 
paid for it. A short time later he'd found a ticket from the 
shop in Mont-de-Piet e in her room which proved that 
she'd pawned two bracelets. Until then he hadn't even 
known the bracelets existed. "It was clear that she was 
cheating on me. So I left her. But first I smacked her 
around. And then I told her exactly what I thought of 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
her. I told her that all she was interested in was getting 
into the sack. You see, Monsieur Meursault, it's like I 
told her: 'You don't realize that everybody's jealous of 
how good you have it with me. Someday you'll know just 
how good it was.' " 
He'd beaten her till she bled. He'd never beaten her 
before. ''I'd smack her around a little, but nice-like, you 
might say. She'd scream a little. I'd close the shutters 
and it always ended the same way. But this time it's 
for real. And if you ask me, she still hasn't gotten what 
she has corning." 
Then he explained that that was what he needed 
advice about. He stopped to adjust the lamp's wick, 
which was smoking. I just listened. I'd drunk close to a 
liter of wine and my temples were burning. I was 
smoking Raymond's cigarett es because I'd run out. The 
last streetcars were going by, taking the now distant 
sounds of the neighborhood with them. Raymond went 
on. What bothered him was that he "still had sexual 
feelings for her." But he wanted to punish her. First 
he'd thought of taking her to a hotel and calling the 
vice squad to cause a scandal and have her listed as a 
common prostitute. After that he'd looked up some of his 
underworld friends. But they didn't come up with any­
thing. As Raymond pointed out to me, a lot of good it 
does being in the underworld. He'd said the same thing 
to them, and then they'd suggested "marking" her. But 
that wasn't what he wanted. He was going to think 
about it. But first he wanted to ask me someth ing. Be-0 THE ST RANGE R 0 
fore he did, though, he wanted to know what I thought 
of the whole thing. I said I didn't think anything but 
that it was interesting. He asked if I thought she was 
cheating on him, and it seemed to me she was; if I 
thought she should be punished and what I would do 
in his place, and I said you can't ever be sure, but I 
understood his wanting to punish her. I drank a little 
more wine. He lit a cigarette and let me in on what he 
was thinking about doing. He wanted to write her a 
letter, "one with a punch and also some things in it to 
make her sorry for what she's done." Then, when she 
carne running back, he'd go to bed with her and "right 
at the last minute" he'd spit in her face and throw her 
out. Yes, that would punish her, I thought. But Ray­
mond told me he didn't think he could write the kind 
of letter it would take and that he'd thought of asking 
me to write it for him. Since I didn't say anything, he 
asked if I'd mind doing it right then and I said no. 
He downed a glass of wine and then stood up. He 
pushed aside the plates and the little bit of cold sausage 
we'd left. He carefully wiped the oilcloth covering the 
table. Then from a drawer in his night table he took out 
a sheet of paper, a yellow envelope, a small red pen box, 
and a square bottle with purple ink in it. When he told 
me the woman's name I realized she was Moorish. I 
wrote the letter. I did it just as it came to me, but I 
tried my best to please Raymond because I didn't have 
any reason not to please him. Then I read it out loud. He 
listened, smoking and nodding his head; then he asked 0 THE ST RANGE R 0 
me to read it again. He was very pleased. He said, "I 
could tell you knew about these things." I didn't notice 
at first, but he had stopped calling me "monsieur." It 
was only when he announced "Now you're a pal, 
l\lleursault" and said it again that it struck me. He re· 
peated his remark and I said, "Yes." I didn't mind being 
his pal, and he seemed set on it. He sealed the letter 
and we finished off the wine. Then we sat and smoked 
for a while without saying anything. Outside, every· 
thing was quiet; we heard the sound of a car passing. I 
said, "It's late." Raymond thought so too. He remarked 
how quickly the time passed, and in a way it was true. 
I felt sleepy, but it was hard for me to get up. I must 
have looked tired, because Raymond told me not to let 
things get to me. At first I didn't understand. Then he 
explained that he'd heard about l\llaman's death but 
that it was one of those things that was bound to happen 
sooner or later. I thought so too. 
I got up. Raymond gave me a very firm hand shake 
and said that men always understand each other. I left 
his room, closing the door behind me, and paused for a 
minute in the dark, on the landing. The house was 
quiet, and a breath of dark, dank air wafted up from 
deep in the stairwell. All I could hear was the blood 
pounding in my ears. I stood there, motionless. And in 
old Salamano's room, the dog whimpered softly. 
33 4 
I worked hard all week. Raymond stopped by and told 
me he'd sent the letter. I went to the movies twice with 
Emmanuel, who doesn't always understand what's going 
on on the screen. So you have to explain things to him. 
Yesterday was Saturday, and Marie came over as we'd 
planned. I wanted her so bad when I saw her in that 
pretty red-and-white striped dress and leather sandals. 
You could make out the shape of her firm breasts, and 
her tan made her face look like a Hower. We caught a 
bus and went a few kilometers outside Algiers, to a 
beach with rocks at either end, bordered by shore grass 
on the land side. The four o'clock sun wasn't too hot, 
but the water was warm, with slow, gently lapping waves." 
Marie taught me a game. As you swam, you had to 
skim off the foam from the crest of the waves with your 
mouth, hold it there, then roll over on your back and 
spout it out toward the sky. This made a delicate froth 
which disappeared into the air or fell back in a warm 
spray over my face. But after a while my mouth was 
stinging with the salty bitterness. Then Marie swam 
over to me and pressed herself against me in the water. 
34 0 THE STRA NGE R 0 
She put her lips on mine. Her tongue cooled my lips 
and we tumbled in the waves for a moment. 
When we'd gotten dressed again on the beach, Marie 
looked at me with her eyes sparkling. I kissed her. We 
didn't say anything more from that point on. I held her 
to me and we hurried to catch a bus, get back, go to my 
place, and throw ourselves onto my bed. I'd left my 
window open, and the summer night air Rowing over 
our brown bodies felt good. 
That morning Marie stayed and I told her that we 
would have lunch together. I went downstairs to buy 
some meat. On my way back upstairs I heard a woman's 
voice in Raymond's room. A little later old Salamano 
growled at his dog; we heard the sound of footsteps and 
claws on the wooden stairs and then "Lousy, stinking 
bastard" and they went down into the street. I told 
Marie all about the old man and she laughed. She was 
wearing a pair of my pajamas with the sleeves rolled up. 
When she laughed I wanted her again. A minute later 
she asked me if I loved her. I told her it didn't mean any­
thing but that I didn't think so. She looked sad. But 
as we were fixing lunch, and for no apparent reason, she 
laughed in such a way that I kissed her. It was then 
that we heard what sounded like a fight break out in 
Raymond's room. 
First we heard a woman's shrill voice and then 
Raymond saying, "You used me, you used me. I'll teach 
you to use me." There were some thuds and the woman 
screamed, but in such a terrifying way that the landing 
35 0 THE ST RANGE R 0 
immedia tely filled with people. Marie and I went to see, 
too. The woman was still shrieking and Raymond was 
still hitting her. Marie said it was terrible and I didn't 
say anything. She asked me to go find a policeman, but 
I told her I didn't like cops. One showed up anyway with 
the tenant from the third floor, who's a plumber. The 
cop knocked on the door and we couldn't hear anything 
anymore. He knocked harder and after a minute the 
woman started crying and Raymond opened the door. 
He had a cigarette in his mouth and an innocent look on 
his face. The girl rushed to the door and told the police­
man that Raymond had hit her. "What's your name?" 
the cop said. Raymond told him. "Take that cigarette 
out of your mouth when you're talking to me," the cop 
said. Raymond hesitated, looked at me, and took a drag 
on his cigarette. Right then the cop slapped him-a 
thick, heavy smack right across the face. The cigarette 
went flying across the landing. The look on Raymond's 
face changed, but he didn't say anything for a minute, 
and then he asked, in a meek voice, if he could pick up 
his cigarette. The cop said to go ahead and added, 
"Next time you'll know better than to clown around 
with a policem an." Meanwhile the girl was crying and 
h d "H b I H , 0 I" "Offi " s e repeate , e eat me up. e s a p1mp. cer, 
Raymond asked, "is that legal, calling a man a pimp like 
that?" But the cop ordered him to shut his trap. Then 
Raymond turned to the girl and said, "You just wait, 
sweetheart -we're not through yet." The cop told him 
to knock it off and said that the girl was to go and he was 
to stay in his room and wait to be summoned to the 
36 o THE STRANGE R 0 
police station. He also said that Raymond ought to be 
ashamed to be so drunk that he'd have the shakes like 
that. Then Raymond explained, ''I'm not drunk, officer. 
It's just that I'm here, and you're there, and I'm shaking, 
I can't help it." He shut his door and everybody went 
away. Marie and I finished fixing lunch. But she wasn't 
hungry; I ate almost everyth ing. She left at one o'clock 
and I slept awhile. 
Around three o'clock there was a knock on my door 
and Raymond came in. I didn't get up. He sat down on 
the edge of my bed. He didn't say anything for a minute 
and I asked him how it had all gone. He told me that 
he'd done what he wanted to do but that she'd slapped 
him and so he'd beaten her up. I'd seen the rest. I told 
him it seemed to me that she'd gotten her punishment 
now and he ought to be happy. He thought so too, and 
he pointed out that the cop could do anything he wanted, 
it wouldn't change the fact that she'd gotten her beat­
ing. He added that he knew all about cops and how to 
handle them. Then he asked me if I'd expected him to 
hit the cop back. I said I wasn't expecting anything, and 
besides I didn't like cops. Raymond seemed pretty happy. 
He asked me if I wanted to go for a walk with him. I 
got up and started combing my hair. He told me that 
I'd have to act as a witness for him. It didn't matter to 
me, but I didn't know what I was supposed to say. 
According to Raymond, all I had to do was to state that 
the girl had cheated on him. I agreed to act as a wit­
ness for him. 
We went out and Raymond bought me a brandy. 
37 0 THE STRANGE R o 
Then he wanted to shoot a game of pool, and I just 
barely lost. Afterwards he wanted to go to a whorehouse, 
but I said no, because I don't like that. So we took our 
time getting back, him telling me how glad he was that 
he'd been able to give the woman what she deserved. I 
found him very friendly with me and I thought it was a 
nice moment. 
From a distance I noticed old Salarnano standing on 
the doorstep. He looked flustered. When we got closer, 
I saw that he didn't have his dog. He was looking all 
over the place, turning around, peering into the darkness 
of the entryway, muttering incoherently, and then he 
started searching the street again with his little red eyes. 
When Raymond asked him what was wrong,, he didn't 
answer right away. I barely heard him mumble "Stink­
ing bastard," and he went on fidgeting around. I asked 
him where his dog was. He snapped at me and said he 
was gone. And then all of a sudden the words carne 
pouring out: "I took him to the Parade Ground, like 
always. There were lots of people around the booths 
at the fair. I stopped to watch The King of the Escape 
Artists.' And when I was ready to go, he wasn't there. 
Sure, I've been meaning to get him a smaller collar for 
a long time. But I never thought the bastard would take 
off like that." 
Then Raymond pointed out to him that the dog 
might have gotten lost and that he would come back. 
He gave examples of dogs that had walked dozens of 
kilometers to get back to their masters. Nevertheless, the 0 THE STRANGE R o 
old man looked even more flustered. "But they'll take 
him away from me, don't you see? If only somebody 
would take him in. But that's impossible -everyb ody's 
disgusted by his scabs. The police'll get him for sure." 
So I told him he should go to the pound and they'd give 
the dog back to him after he paid a fee. He asked me if 
it was a big fee. I didn't know. Then he got mad : "Pay 
money for that bastard-hal He can damn well die!" 
And he started cursing the dog. Raymond laughed and 
went inside. I followed him and we parted upstairs on 
the landing. A minute later I heard the old man's foot­
steps and he knocked on my door. When I opened it, he 
stood in the doorway for a minute and said, "Excuse me, 
excuse me." I asked him to come in, but he refused. He 
was looking down at the tips of his shoes and his scabby 
hands were trembling. Without looking up at me he 
asked, "They're not going to take him away from me, 
are they, Monsieur Meursault? They'll give him back 
to me. Otherwise, what's going to happen to me?" I 
told him that the pound kept dogs for three days so that 
their owners could come and claim them and that after 
that they did with them as they saw fit. He looked at 
me in silence. Then he said, "Good night." He shut his 
door and I heard him pacing back and forth. His bed 
creaked. And from the peculiar little noise coming 
through the partition, I realized he was crying. For 
some reason I thought of Maman. But I had to get up 
early the next morning. I wasn't hungry, and I went 
to bed without any dinner. 
39 5 
Raymond called me at the office. He told me that a 
friend of his (he'd spoken to him about me) had invited 
me to spend the day Sunday at his little beach house, 
near Algiers. I said I'd really like to, but I'd promised to 
spend the day with a girlfriend. Raymond immediately 
told me that she was invited too. His friend's wife would 
be very glad not to be alone with a bunch of men. 
I wanted to hang up right away because I know the 
boss doesn't like people calling us from town. But Ray­
mond asked me to hang on and told me he could have 
passed on the invitation that evening, but he had some­
thing else to tell me. He'd been followed all day by a 
group of Arabs, one of whom was the brother of his 
former mistress. "If you see him hanging around the 
building when you get home this evening, let me know." 
I said I would. 
A little later my boss sent for me, and for a second I 
was annoyed, because I thought he was going to tell me 
to do less talking on the phone and more work. But that 
wasn't it at all. He told me he want ed to talk to me about 
a plan of his that was still pretty vague. He just wanted 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
to have my opinion on the matter. He was planning to 
open an office in Paris which would handle his business 
directly with the big companies, on the spot, and he 
wanted to know how I felt about going there. I'd be 
able to live in Paris and to travel around for part of the 
year as well. "You're young, and it seems to me it's the 
kind of life that would appeal to you." I said yes but 
that really it was all the same to me. Then he asked me 
if I wasn't interested in a change of life. I said that peo­
ple never change their lives, that in any case one life was 
as good as another and that I wasn't dissatisfied with 
mine here at all. He looked upset and told me that I 
never gave him a straight answer, that I had no ambition, 
and that that was disastrous in business. So I went back 
to work. I would rather not have upset him, but I 
couldn't see any reason to change my life. Looking back 
on it, I wasn't unhappy. When I was a student, I had 
lots of ambitions like that. But when I had to give up my 
studies I learned very quickly that none of it really 
mattered. 
That evening Marie carne by to see me and asked me 
if I wanted to marry her. I said it didn't make any differ­
ence to me and that we could if she wanted to. Then she 
wanted to know if I loved her. I answered the same way 
I had the last time, that it didn't mean anything but that 
I probably didn't love her. "So why marry me, then?" 
she said. I explained to her that it didn't really matter 
and that if she wanted to, we could get married. Besides, 
she was the one who was doing the asking and all I was 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
saying was yes. Then she pointed out that marriage was 
a serious thing. I said, "No." She stopped talking for a 
minute and looked at me without saying anything. Then 
she spoke. She just wanted to know if I would have 
accepted the same proposal from another woman, with 
whom I was involved in the same way. I said, "Sure." 
Then she said she wondered if she loved me, and there 
was no way I could know about that. After another 
moment's silence, she mumbled that I was peculiar, that 
that was probably why she loved me but that one day I 
might hate her for the same reason. I didn't say anything, 
because I didn't have anything to add, so she took my arm 
with a smile and said she wanted to marry me. I said 
we could do it whenever she wanted. Then I told her 
about my boss's proposition and she said she'd love to see 
Paris. I told her that I'd lived there once and she asked 
me what it was like. I said, "It's dirty. Lots of pigeons and 
dark courtyards. Everybody's pale." 
Then we went for a walk through the main streets to 
the other end of town. The women were beautiful and I 
asked Marie if she'd noticed. She said yes and that she 
understood what I meant. For a while neither of us said 
anything. But I wanted her to stay with me, and I told 
her we could have dinner together at Celeste's. She 
would have liked to but she had something to do. We 
were near my place and I said goodbye to her. She 
looked at me. "Don't you want to know what I have to 
do?" I did, but I hadn't thought to ask, and she seemed to 
be scolding me. Then, seeing me so confused, she 
42 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
laughed again and she moved toward me with her whole 
body to offer me her lips. 
I had dinner at Celeste's. I'd already started eating 
when a strange little woman came in and asked me if 
she could sit at my table. Of course she could. Her 
gestures were jerky and she had bright eyes in a little 
face like an apple. She took off her jacket, sat down, and 
studied the menu feverishly. She called Celeste over and 
ordered her whole meal all at once, in a voice that was 
clear and very fast at the same time. While she was 
waiting for her first course, she opened her bag, took 
out a slip of paper and a pencil, added up the bill in 
advance, then took the exact amount, plus tip, out of a 
vest pocket and set it down on the table in front of her. 
At that point the waiter brought her first course and she 
gulped it down. While waiting for the next course, she 
again took out of her bag a blue pencil and a magazine 
that listed the radio programs for the week. One by one, 
and with great care, she checked off almost every pro­
gram. Since the magazine was about a dozen pages long, 
she meticulously continued this task throughout the 
meal. I had already finished and she was still checking 
away with the same zeal. Then she stood up, put her 
jacket back on with the same robotlike movements, and 
left. I didn't have anything to do, so I left too and fol­
lowed her for a while. She had positioned herself right 
next to the curb and was making her way with in­
credible speed and assurance, never once swerving or 
looking around. I eventually lost sight of her and turned 
43 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
back. I thought about how peculiar she was but forgot 
about her a few minutes later. 
I found old Salamano waiting outside my door. I 
asked him in and he told me that his dog was lost, be­
cause it wasn't at the pound. The people who worked 
there had told him that maybe it had been run over. He 
asked if he could find out at the police station. They 
told him that they didn't keep track of things like that 
because they happened every day. I told old Salamano 
that he could get another dog, but he was right to point 
out to me that he was used to this one. 
I was sitting cross-legged on my bed and Salamano 
had sat down on a chair in front of the table. He was 
facing me and he had both hands on his knees. He had 
kept his old felt hat on. He was mumbling bits and pieces 
of sentences through his yellowing moustache. He was 
getting on my nerves a little, but I didn't have anything 
to do and I didn't feel sleepy. Just for something to say, I 
asked him about his dog. He told me he'd gotten it after 
his wife died. He had married fairly late. When he was 
young he'd wanted to go into the theater: in the army he 
used to act in military vaudevilles. But he had ended 
up working on the railroads, and he didn't regret it, 
because now he had a small pension. He hadn't been 
happy with his wife, but he'd pretty much gotten used 
to her. When she died he had been very lonely. So he 
asked a shop buddy for a dog and he'd gotten this one 
very young. He'd had to feed it from a bottle. But since 
a dog doesn't live as long as a man, they'd ended up 
44 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
being old together. "He was bad-temper ed," Salamano 
said. "We'd have a run-in every now and then. But he 
was a good dog just the same." I said he was well bred 
and Salamano looked pleased. "And," he added, "you 
didn't know him before he got sick. His coat was the 
best thing about him." Every night and every morning 
after the dog had gotten that skin disease, Salamano 
rubbed him with ointment. But according to him, the 
dog's real sickness was old age, and there's no cure for 
old age. 
At that point I yawned, and the old man said he'd be 
going. I told him that he could stay and that I was sorry 
about what had happened to his dog. He thanked me. 
He told me that Maman was very fond of his dog. He 
called her "your poor mother." He said he supposed I 
must be very sad since Maman died, and I didn't say 
anything. Then he said, very quickly and with an em­
barrassed look, that he realized that some people in the 
neighborhood thought badly of me for having sent 
Maman to the home, but he knew me and he knew I 
loved her very much. I still don't know why, but I said 
that until then I hadn't realized that people thought 
badly of me for doing it, but that the home had seemed 
like the natural thing since I didn't have enough money 
to have Maman cared for. "Anywa y," I added, "it had 
been a long time since she'd had anything to say to me, 
and she was bored all by herself." "Yes," he said, "and at 
least in a home you can make a few friends." Then he 
said good night. He \Nanted to sleep. His life had changed 
45 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
now and he wasn't too sure what he was going to do. 
For the first time since I'd known him, and with a furtive 
gesture, he offered me his hand, and I felt the scales on 
his skin. He gave a little smile, and before he left he 
said, "I hope the dogs don't bark tonight. I always think 
it's mine." 6 
I had a hard time waking up on Sunday, and Marie had 
to call me and shake me. We didn't eat anything, be­
cause we wanted to get to the beach early. I felt com­
pletely drained and I had a slight headache. My cigarette 
tasted bitter. Marie made fun of me because , she said, 
I had on a "funeral face." She had put on a white 
linen dress and let her hair down. I told her she was 
beautiful and she laughed with delight. 
On our way downstairs we knocked on Raymond's 
door. He told us he'd be right down. Once out in the 
street, because I was so tired and also because we hadn't 
opened the blinds, the day, already bright with sun, hit 
me like a slap in the face. Marie was jumping with joy 
and kept on saying what a beautiful day it was. I felt a 
little better and I noticed that I was hungry. I told Marie, 
who pointed to her oilcloth bag where she'd put our bath­
ing suits and a towel. I just had to wait and then we 
heard Raymond shutting his door. He had on blue 
trousers and a white short-sleeved shirt. But he'd put on 
a straw hat, which made Marie laugh, and his forearms 
were all white under the black hairs. I found it a little 
47 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
repulsive. He was whistling as he came down the stairs 
and he seemed very cheerful. He said "Good morning, 
old man" to me and called Marie "mademoisel le." 
The day before, we'd gone to the police station 
and I'd testified that the girl had cheated on Raymond. 
He'd gotten off with a warning. They didn't check out 
my statement. Outside the front door we talked about 
it with Raymond, and then we decided to take the bus. 
The beach wasn't very far, but we'd get there sooner 
that way. Raymond thought his friend would be glad 
to see us get there early. We were just about to leave 
when all of a sudden Raymond motioned to me to look 
across the street. I saw a group of Arabs leaning against 
the front of the tobacconist's shop. They were staring at 
us in silence, but in that way of theirs, as if we were 
nothing but stones or dead trees. Raymond told me that 
the second one from the left was his man, and he seemed 
worried. But, he added, it was all settled now. Marie 
didn't really understand and asked us what was wrong. 
I told her that they were Arabs who had it in for Ray­
mond. She wanted to get going right away. Raymond 
drew himself up and laughed, saying we'd better step 
on it. 
We headed toward the bus stop, which wasn't far, 
and Raymond said that the Arabs weren't following us. 
I turned around. They were still in the same place and 
they were looking with the same in difference at the spot 
where we'd just been standing. We caught the bus. 
Raymond, who seemed very relieved, kept on cracking 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
jokes for Marie. I could tell he liked her, but she hardly 
said anything to him. Every once in a while she'd look at 
him and laugh. 
We got off in the outskirts of Algiers. The beach 
wasn't far from the bus stop. But we had to cross a small 
plateau which overlooks the sea and then drops steeply 
down to the beach. It was covered with yellowish rocks 
and the whitest asphodels set against the already hard 
blue of the sky. Marie was having fun scattering the 
petals, taking big swipes at them with her oilcloth bag. 
We walked between rows of small houses behind green 
or white fences, some with their verandas hidden be­
hind the tamarisks, others standing naked among the 
rocks. Before we reached the edge of the plateau, we 
could already see the motionless sea and, farther out, a 
massive, drowsy-looking promon tory in the clear water. 
The faint hum of a motor rose up to us in the still air. 
And way off, we saw a tiny trawler moving, almost im­
perceptibly, across the dazzling sea. Marie gathered 
some rock irises. From the slope leading down to the 
beach, we could see that there were already some people 
swimming. 
Raymond's friend lived in a little wooden bungalow 
at the far end of the beach. The back of the house 
rested up against the rocks, and the pilings that held it 
up in front went straight down into the water. Raymond 
introduced us. His friend's name was Masson. He was a 
big guy, very tall and broad-sh ouldered, with a plump, 
sweet little wife with a Parisian accent. Right off he told 
49 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
us to make ourselves at horne and said that his wife had 
just fried up some fish he'd caught that morning. I told 
him how nice I thought his house was. He told me that 
he spent Saturdays and Sundays and all his days off 
there. "With my wife, of course," he added. Just then 
his wife was laughing with Marie. For the first time 
maybe, I really thought I was going to get married. 
Masson wanted to go for a swim, but his wife and 
Raymond didn't want to come. The three of us went 
down to the beach and Marie jumped right in. Masson 
and I waited a little. He spoke slowly, and I noticed 
that he had a habit of finishing everything he said with 
"and I'd even say," when really it didn't add anything to 
the meaning of his sentence. Referring to Marie, he 
said, "She's stunning, and I'd even say charming." After 
that I didn't pay any more attention to this mannerism 
of his, because I was absorbed by the feeling that the 
sun was doing me a lot of good. The sand was starting 
to get hot underfoot. I held back the urge to get into the 
water a minute longer, but finally I said to Masson , 
"Shall we?" I dove in. He waded in slowly and started 
swimming only when he couldn't touch bottom anymore. 
He did the breast stroke, and not too well, either, so I 
left him and joined Marie. The water was cold and I was 
glad to be swimming. Together again, Marie and I 
swam out a ways, and we felt a closeness as we moved 
in unison and were happy. 
Out in deeper water we floated on our backs and 
the sun on my upturned face was drying the last of the 
so 0 THE STR ANGER o 
water trickling into my mouth. We saw Masson making 
his way back to the beach to stretch out in the sun. 
From far away he looked huge. Marie wanted us to 
swim together. I got behind her to hold her around 
the waist. She used her arms to move us forward and 
I did the kicking. The little splashing sound followed 
us through the morning air until I got tired. I left 
Marie and headed back, swimming smoothly and breath­
ing easily. On the beach I stretched out on my stomach 
alongside Masson and put my face on the sand. I said 
it was nice and he agreed. Soon afterwards Marie came 
back. I rolled over to watch her coming. She was 
glistening all over with salty water and holding her hair 
back. She lay down right next to me and the combined 
warmth from her body and from the sun made me doze 
off. 
Marie shook me and told me that Masson had gone 
back up to the house, that it was time for lunch. I got 
up right away because I was hungry, but Marie told me 
I hadn't kissed her since that morning. It was true, 
and yet I had wanted to. "Come into the water," she said. 
We ran and threw ourselves into the first little waves. 
We swam a few strokes and she reached out and held 
on to me. I felt her legs wrapped around mine and I 
wanted her. 
When we got back, Masson was already calling us. 
I said I was starving and then out of the blue he an­
nounced to his wife that he liked me. The bread was 
good; I devoured my share of the fish. After that there 
51 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
was some meat and fried potatoes. We all ate without 
talking. Masson drank a lot of wine and kept filling my 
glass. By the time the coffee carne, my head felt heavy 
and I smoked a lot. Masson, Raymond, and I talked 
about spending August together at the beach, sharing 
expenses. Suddenly Marie said, "Do you know what 
time it is? It's only eleven-th irty!" We were all sur­
prised, but Masson said that we'd eaten very early and 
that it was only natural because lunchtime was when­
ever you were hungry. For some reason that made Marie 
laugh. I think she'd had a little too much to drink. 
Then Masson asked me if I wanted to go for a walk on 
the beach with him. "My wife always takes a nap after 
lunch. Me, I don't like naps. I need to walk. I tell her all 
the time it's better for her health. But it's her business ." 
Marie said she'd stay and help Madame Masson with 
the dishes. The little Parisienne said that first they'd have 
to get rid of the men. The three of us went down to the 
beach. 
The sun was shining almost directly overhead onto 
the sand, and the glare on the water was unbearable. 
There was no one left on the beach. From inside the 
bungalows bordering the plateau and jutting out over 
the water, we could hear the rattling of plates and 
silverware. It was hard to breathe in the rocky heat 
rising from the ground. At first Raymond and Masson 
discussed people and things I didn't know about. I 
gathered they'd known each other for a long time and 
had even lived together at one point. We headed down 0 THE ST RANGE R 0 
to the sea and walked along the water's edge. Now and 
then a little wave would come up higher than the 
others and wet our canvas shoes. I wasn't thinking 
about anything, because I was half asleep from the sun 
beating down on my bare head. 
At that point Raymond said something to Masson 
which I didn't quite catch. But at the same time I 
noticed, at the far end of the beach and a long way from 
us, two Arabs in blue overalls coming in our direction. 
I looked at Raymond and he said, "It's him." We kept 
walking. Masson asked how they'd managed to follow 
us all this way. I thought they must have seen us get on 
the bus with a beach bag, but I didn't say anything. 
The Arabs were walking slowly, but they were 
already much closer. We didn't change our pace, but 
Raymond said, "If there's any trouble, Masson, you 
take the other one. I'll take care of my man. Meursault, 
if another one shows up, he's yours." I said, "Yes," and 
Masson put his hands in his pockets. The blazing sand 
looked red to me now. We moved steadily toward the 
Arabs. The distance between us was getting shorter and 
shorter. When we were just a few steps away from each 
other, the Arabs stopped. Masson and I slowed down. 
Raymond went right up to his man. I couldn't hear 
what he said to him, but the other guy made a move as 
though he were going to butt him. Then Raymond struck 
the first blow and called Masson right away. Masson went 
for the one that had been pointed out as his and hit him 
twice, as hard as he could. The Arab fell Aat in the water, 
53 0 THE STRANGE R o 
facedown, and lay there for several seconds with bubbles 
bursting on the surface around his head. Meanwhile 
Raymond had landed one too, and the other Arab's face 
was bleeding. Raymond turned to me and said, "Watch 
this. I'm gonna let him have it now." I shouted, "Look 
out, he's got a knife!" But Raymond's arm had already 
been cut open and his mouth slashed. Masson lunged 
forward. But the other Arab had gotten back up and gone 
around behind the one with the knife. We didn't dare 
move. They started backing off slowly, without taking 
their eyes off us, keeping us at bay with the knife. When 
they thought they were far enough away, they took off 
running as fast as they could while we stood there 
motionless in the sun and Raymond clutched at his arm 
dripping with blood. 
Masson immediat ely said there was a doctor who 
spent his Sundays up on the plateau. Raymond wanted 
to go see him right away. But every time he tried to talk 
the blood bubbled in his mouth. We steadied him and 
made our way back to the bungalow as quickly as we 
could. Once there, Raymond said that they were only 
flesh wounds and that he could make it to the doctor's. 
He left with Masson and I stayed to explain to the 
women what had happened. Madame Masson was cry­
ing and Marie was very pale. I didn't like having to ex­
plain to them, so I just shut up, smoked a cigarette, and 
looked at the sea. 
Raymond came back with Masson around one-thirty. 
His arm was bandaged up and he had an adhesive 
54 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
plaster on the comer of his mouth. The doctor had told 
him that it was nothing, but Raymond looked pretty 
grim. Masson tried to make him laugh. But he still 
wouldn't say anything. When he said he was going 
down to the beach, I asked him where he was going. 
He said he wanted to get some air. Masson and I said 
we'd go with him. But that made him angry and he swore 
at us. Masson said not to argue with him. I followed 
him anyway. 
We walked on the beach for a long time. By now 
the sun was overpoweri ng. It shattered into little pieces 
on the sand and water. I had the impression that Ray­
mond knew where he was going, but I was probably 
wrong. At the far end of the beach we finally came to a 
little spring running down through the sand behind a 
large rock. There we found our two Arabs. They were 
lying down, in their greasy overalls. They seemed per­
fectly calm and almost content. Our coming changed 
nothing. The one who had attacked Raymond was 
looking at him without saying anything. The other one 
was blowing through a little reed over and over again, 
watching us out of the comer of his eye. He kept repeat­
ing the only three notes he could get out of his in­
strument. 
The whole time there was nothing but the sun and 
the silence, with the low gurgling from the spring and 
the three notes. Then Raymond put his hand in his 
hip pocket, but the others didn't move, they just kept 
looking at each other. I noticed that the toes on the one 
55 0 THE STRANGER o 
playing the flute were tensed. But without taking his 
eyes off his adversary, Raymond asked me, "Should I 
let him have it?" I thought that if I said no he'd get 
himself all worked up and shoot for sure. All I said was, 
"He hasn't said anything yet. It'd be pretty lousy to 
shoot him like that." You could still hear the sound of 
the water and the flute deep within the silence and the 
heat. Then Raymond said, "So I'll call him something 
and when he answers back, I'll let him have it." I 
answered, "Right. But if he doesn't draw his knife, you 
can't shoot." Raymond started getting worked up. The 
other Arab went on playing, and both of them were 
watching every move Raymond made. "No," I said 
to Raymond, "take him on man to man and give me your 
gun. If the other one moves in, or if he draws his knife, 
I'll let him have it." 
The sun glinted off Raymond's gun as he handed it 
to me. But we just stood there motionless, as if every­
thing had closed in around us. We stared at each other 
without blinking, and everything carne to a stop there 
between the sea, the sand, and the sun, and the double 
silence of the flute and the water. It was then that I 
realized that you could either shoot or not shoot. But 
all of a sudden, the Arabs, backing away, slipped be­
hind the rock. So Raymond and I turned and headed 
back the way we'd come. He seemed better and talked 
about the bus back. 
I went with him as far as the bungalow, and as he 
climbed the wooden steps, I just stood there at the 
s6 0 THE ST RANGE R o 
bottom, my head ringing from the sun, unable to face 
the effort it would take to climb the wooden staircase 
and face the women again. But the heat was so intense 
that it was just as bad standing still in the blinding 
stream falling from the sky. To stay or to go, it amounted 
to the same thing. A minute later I turned back toward 
the beach and started walking. 
There was the same dazzling red glare. The sea 
gasped for air with each shallow, stifled little wave that 
broke on the sand. I was walking slowly toward the 
rocks and I could feel my forehead swelling under the 
sun. All that heat was pressing down on me and making 
it hard for me to go on. And every time I felt a blast of 
its hot breath strike my face, I gritted my teeth, clenched 
my fists in my trouser pockets, and strained every nerve 
in order to overcome the sun and the thick drunkenness 
it was spilling over me. With every blade of light that 
Hashed off the sand, from a bleached shell or a piece of 
broken glass, my jaws tightened. I walked for a long 
time. 
From a distance I could see the small, dark mass of 
rock surrounded by a blinding halo of light and sea 
spray. I was thinking of the cool spring behind the rock. 
I wanted to hear the murmur of its water again, to escape 
the sun and the strain and the women's tears, and to 
find shade and rest again at last. But as I got closer, I 
saw that Raymond's man had come back. 
He was alone. He was lying on his back, with his 
hands behind his head, his forehead in the shade of the 
57 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
rock, the rest of his body in the sun. His blue overalls 
seemed to be steaming in the heat. I was a little sur­
prised. As far as I was concerned, the whole thing was 
over, and I'd gone there without even thinking about it. 
As soon as he saw me, he sat up a little and put his 
hand in his pocket. Naturally, I gripped Raymond's 
gun inside my jacket. Then he lay back again, but with­
out taking his hand out of his pocket. I was pretty far 
away from him, about ten meters or so. I could tell he was 
glancing at me now and then through half-closed eyes. 
But most of the time, he was just a form shimmering 
before my eyes in the fiery air. The sound of the waves 
was even lazier, more drawn out than at noon. It was 
the same sun, the same light still shining on the same 
sand as before. For two hours the day had stood still; 
for two hours it had been anchored in a sea of molten 
lead. On the horizon, a tiny steamer went by, and I 
made out the black dot from the corner of my eye be­
cause I hadn't stopped watching the Arab. 
It occurred to me that all I had to do was turn 
around and that would be the end of it. But the whole 
beach, throbbing in the sun, was pressing on my back. I 
took a few steps toward the spring. The Arab didn't 
move. Besides, he was still pretty far away. Maybe it 
was the shadows on his face, but it looked like he was 
laughing. I waited. The sun was starting to burn my 
cheeks, and I could feel drops of sweat gathering in my 
eyebrows. The sun was the same as it had been the 
day I'd buried Maman, and like then, my forehead 
ss 0 THE ST RANGE R o 
especially was hurting me, all the veins in it throbbing 
under the skin. It was this burning, which I couldn't 
stand anymore, that made me move forward. I knew 
that it was stupid, that I wouldn't get the sun off me 
by stepping forward. But I took a step, one step, forward. 
And this time, without getting up, the Arab drew his 
knife and held it up to me in the sun. The light shot off 
the steel and it was like a long Hashing blade cutting at 
my forehead. At the same instant the sweat in my eye­
brows dripped down over my eyelids all at once and 
covered them with a warm, thick film. My eyes were 
blinded behind the curtain of tears and salt. All I could 
feel were the cymbals of sunlight crashing on my fore­
head and, indistinctly, the dazzling spear Hying up from 
the knife in front of me. The scorching blade slashed at 
my eyelashes and stabbed at my stinging eyes. That's 
when everyth ing began to reel. The sea carried up a 
thick, fiery breath. It seemed to me as if the sky split open 
from one end to the other to rain down fire. My whole 
being tensed and I squeezed my hand around the 
revolver. The trigger gave; I felt the smooth underside 
of the butt; and there, in that noise, sharp and deafen­
ing at the same time, is where it all started. I shook off 
the sweat and sun. I knew that I had shattered the 
harmony of the day, the exceptional silence of a beach 
where I'd been happy. Then I fired four more times at 
the motionless body where the bullets lodged without 
leaving a trace. And it was like knocking four quick times 
on the door of unhappiness. 
59 PAitTTWO 1 
Right after my arrest I was questioned several times, but 
it was just so they could find out who I was, which didn't 
take long. The first time, at the police station, nobody 
seemed very interested in my case. A week later, how­
ever, the examining magistrate looked me over with 
curiosity. But to get things started he simply asked my 
name and address, my occupation, the date and place of 
my birth. Then he want ed to know if I had hired an 
attorney. I admitted I hadn't and inquired whether it 
was really necessary to have one. "Why do you ask?" 
he said. I said I thought my case was pretty simple. He 
smiled and said, "That's your opinion. But the law is 
the law. If you don't hire an attorney yourself, the court 
will appoint one ." I thought it was very convenient that 
the court should take care of those details. I told him 
so. He agreed with me and concluded that it was a 
good law. 
At first, I didn't take him seriously. I was led into a 
curtained room; there was a single lamp on his desk 
which was shining on a chair where he had me sit while 
he remained standing in the shadows. I had read 0 THE STRA NGER 0 
descriptions of scenes like this in books and it all 
seemed like a game to me. After our conversa tion, 
though, I looked at him and saw a tall, fine-featured 
man with deep-set blue eyes, a long gray moustache , and 
lots of thick, almost white hair. He struck me as being 
very reasonable and, overall, quite pleasant, despite a 
nervous tic which made his mouth twitch now and then. 
On my way out I was even going to shake his hand, but 
just in time, I remembered that I had killed a man. 
The next day a lawyer came to see me at the prison. 
He was short and chubby, quite young, his hair care­
fully slicked back. Despite the heat (I was in my shirt 
sleeves), he had on a dark suit, a wing collar, and an 
odd-looking tie with broad black and white stripes. He 
put the briefcase he was carrying down on my bed, in­
troduced himself, and said he had gone over my file. 
My case was a tricky one, but he had no doubts we'd 
win, if I trusted him. I thanked him and he said, "Let's 
get down to business." 
He sat down on the bed and explained to me that 
there had been some investigations into my private life. 
It had been learned that my mother had died recently at 
the horne. Inquiries had then been made in Marengo. 
The investigators had learned that I had "shown in­
sensitivity" the day of Marnan's funeral. "You under­
stand," my lawyer said, "it's a little embarrassing for me 
to have to ask you this. But it's very important. And it 
will be a strong argument for the prosecution if I can't 
come up with some answers ." He wanted me to help him. 0 THE STRANGER 0 
He asked if I had felt any sadness that day. The ques­
tion caught me by surprise and it seemed to me that I 
would have been very embarrassed if I'd had to ask it. 
Nevertheless I answered that I had pretty much lost the 
habit of analyzing myself and that it was hard for me to 
tell him what he wanted to know. I probably did love 
Maman, but that didn't mean anything. At one time or 
another all normal people have wished their loved ones 
were dead. Here the lawyer interrupted me and he 
seemed very upset. He made me promise I wouldn't say 
that at my hearing or in front of the examining magis­
trate. I explained to him, however, that my nature was 
such that my physical needs often got in the way of my 
feelings. The day I buried Maman, I was very tired and 
sleepy, so much so that I wasn't really aware of what 
was going on. What I can say for certain is that I would 
rather Maman hadn't died. But my lawyer didn't seem 
satisfied. He said, "That's not enough ." 
He thought for a minute. He asked me if he could 
say that that day I had held back my natural feelings. I 
said, "No, because it's not true." He gave me a strange 
look, as if he found me slightly disgusting. He told me 
in an almost snide way that in any case the director 
and the staff of the home would be called as witnesses 
and that "things could get very nasty" for me. I pointed 
out to him that none of this had anything to do with my 
case, but all he said was that it was obvious I had never 
had any dealings with the law. 
He left, looking angry. I wished I could have made 
6s 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
him stay, to explain that I wanted things between us to 
be good, not so that he'd defend me better but, if I can 
put it this way, good in a natural way. Mostly, I could 
tell, I made him feel uncomfortable. He didn't under­
stand me, and he was sort of holding it against me. I 
felt the urge to reassure him that I was like everybody 
else, just like everybody else. But really there wasn't 
much point, and I gave up the idea out of laziness. 
Shortly after that, I was taken before the examining 
magistrate again. It was two o'clock in the afternoon, 
and this time his office was filled with sunlight barely 
softened by a flimsy curtain. It was very hot. He had me 
sit down and very politely informed me that, "due to 
unforeseen circumstances," my lawyer had been unable 
to come. But I had the right to remain silent and to wait 
for my lawyer's counsel . I said that I could answer for 
myself. He pressed a button on the table. A young clerk 
came in and sat down right behind me. 
The two of us leaned back in our chairs. The 
examination began. He started out by saying that peo­
ple were describing me as a taciturn and withdrawn 
person and he wanted to know what I thought. I an­
swered, "It's just that I don't have much to say. So I 
keep quiet." He smiled the way he had the first time, 
agreed that that was the best reason of all, and added, 
"Besides, it's not important." Then he looked at me 
without saying anything, leaned forward rather abruptly, 
and said very quickly, "What interests me is you." I 
didn't really understand what he meant by that, so I 
66 0 THE ST RANGE R 0 
didn't respond. "There are one or two things," he 
added, "that I don't quite understand. I'm sure you'll 
help me clear them up." I said it was all pretty simple. 
He pressed me to go back over that day. I went back 
over what I had already told him: Raymond, the beach, 
the swim, the quarrel, then back to the beach, the little 
spring, the sun, and the five shots from the revolver. 
After each sentence he would say, "Fine, fine." When I 
got to the body lying there, he nodded and said, "Good." 
But I was tired of repeating the same story over and 
over. It seemed as if I had never talked so much in my 
life. 
After a short silence, he stood up and told me that he 
wanted to help me, that I interested him, and that, with 
God's help, he would do something for me. But first 
he wanted to ask me a few more questions. Without 
working up to it, he asked if I loved Maman. I said, 
"Yes, the same as anyone," and the clerk, who up to then 
had been typing steadily, must have hit the wrong key, 
because he lost his place and had to go back. Again 
without any apparent logic, the magistrate then asked if 
I had fired all five shots at once. I thought for a minute 
and explained that at first I had fired a single shot and 
then, a few seconds later, the other four. Then he said, 
"Why did you pause between the first and second shot?" 
Once again I could see the red sand and feel the burning 
of the sun on my forehead. But this time I didn't answer. 
In the silence that followed, the magistrate seemed to be 
getting fidgety. He sat down, ran his fingers through his 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
hair, put his elbows on his desk, and leaned toward me 
slightly with a strange look on his face. "Why, why did 
you shoot at a body that was on the ground?" Once again 
I didn't know how to answer. The magistrate ran his 
hands across his forehead and repeated his question with 
a slightly different tone in his voice. "Why? You must 
tell me. Why?" Still I didn't say anything. 
Suddenly he stood up, strode over to a far corner 
of his office, and pulled out a drawer in a file cabinet. 
He took out a silver crucifix which he brandished as he 
came toward me. And in a completely different, almost 
cracked voice, he shouted, "Do you know what this is?" 
I said, "Yes, of course." Speaking very quickly and pas­
sionately, he told me that he believed in God, that it 
was his conviction that no man was so guilty that God 
would not forgive him, but in order for that to happen 
a man must repent and in so doing become like a child 
whose heart is open and ready to embrace all. He was 
leaning all the way over the table. He was waving his 
crucifix almost directly over my head. To tell the truth, 
I had found it very hard to follow his reasoning, first 
because I was hot and there were big Hies in his office 
that kept landing on my face, and also because he was 
scaring me a little. At the same time I knew that that 
was ridiculous because, after all, I was the criminal. He 
went on anyway. I vaguely understood that to his mind 
there was just one thing that wasn't clear in my con­
fession, the fact that I had hesitated before I fired my 
second shot. The rest was fine, but that part he couldn't 
underst and. 
68 0 THE STRANGE R o 
I was about to tell him he was wrong to dwell on it, 
because it really didn't matter. But he cut me off and 
urged me one last time, drawing himself up to his full 
height and asking me if I believed in God. I said no. He 
sat down indignantly. He said it was impossib le; all men 
believed in God, even those who turn their backs on him. 
That was his belief, and if he were ever to doubt it, his 
life would become meaningless. "Do you want my life to 
be meanin gless?" he shouted. As far as I could see, it 
didn't have anything to do with me, and I told him so. 
But from across the table he had already thrust the 
crucifix in my face and was screaming irrationally, "I 
am a Christian. I ask Him to forgive you your sins. How 
can you not believe that He suffered for you?" I was 
struck by how sincere he seemed, but I had had enough. 
It was getting hotter and hotter. As always, whenever I 
want to get rid of someone I'm not really listening to, 
I made it appear as if I agreed. To my surprise, he acted 
triumphant. "You see, you see!" he said. "You do believe, 
don't you, and you're going to place your trust in Him, 
aren't you?" Obviously, I again said no. He fell back 
in his chair. 
He seemed to be very tired. He didn't say anything 
for a minute while the typewriter, which hadn't let up 
the whole time, was still tapping out the last few sen­
tences. Then he looked at me closely and with a little 
sadness in his face. In a low voice he said, "I have never 
seen a soul as hardened as yours. The criminals who have 
come before me have always wept at the sight of this 
image of suffering." I was about to say that that was 
69 o THE STRANGE R o 
precisely because they were criminals. But then I 
realized that I was one too. It was an idea I couldn't get 
used to. Then the judge stood up, as if to give me the 
signal that the examination was over. He simply asked, 
in the same weary tone, if I was sorry for what I had 
done. I thought about it for a minute and said that 
more than sorry I felt kind of annoyed. I got the im­
pression he didn't understand. But that was as far as 
things went that day. 
After that, I saw a lot of the magistrate, except that 
my lawyer was with me each time. But it was just a 
matter of clarifying certain things in my previous state­
ments. Or else the magistrate would discuss the charges 
with my lawyer. But on those occasions they never really 
paid much attention to me. Anyway, the tone of the ques­
tioning gradually changed. The magistrate seemed to 
have lost interest in me and to have come to some sort 
of decision about my case. He didn't talk to me about 
God anymore, and I never saw him as worked up as he 
was that first day. The result was that our discussions 
became more cordial. A few questions, a brief conversa­
tion with my lawyer, and the examinations were over. 
As the magistrate put it, my case was taking its course. 
And then sometimes, when the conversation was of a 
more general nature, I would be included . I started to 
breathe more freely. No one, in any of these meetings, 
was rough with me. Everyth ing was so natural, so well 
handled, and so calmly acted out that I had the ridicu­
lous impression of being "one of the family." And I can 0 THE STRANGER 0 
say that at the end of the eleven months that this in­
vestigation lasted, I was almost surprised that I had ever 
enjoyed anything other than those rare moments when 
the judge would lead me to the door of his office, slap me 
on the shoulder, and say to me cordially, "That's all for 
today, Monsieur Antichrist." I would then be handed 
back over to the police. 2 
There are some things I've never liked talking about. A 
few days after I entered prison, I realized that I wouldn't 
like talking about this part of my life. 
Later on, though, I no longer saw any point to my 
reluctance. In fact, I wasn't really in prison those first 
few days: I was sort of waiting for something to happen. 
It was only after Marie's first and last visit that it all 
started. From the day I got her letter (she told me she 
would no longer be allowed to come, because she wasn't 
my wife), from that day on I felt that I was at home in 
my cell and that my life was coming to a standstill 
there. The day of my arrest I was first put in a room 
where there were already several other prisoners, most of 
them Arabs. They laughed when they saw me. Then they 
asked me what I was in for. I said I'd killed an Arab 
and they were all silent. A few minutes later, it got dark. 
They showed me how to fix the mat I was supposed to 
sleep on. One end could be rolled up to make a pillow. 
All night I felt bugs crawling over my face. A few days 
later I was put in a cell by myself, where I slept on 
wooden boards suspended from the wall. I had a bucket 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
for a toilet and a tin washbasi n. The prison was on 
the heights above the town, and through a small window 
I could see the sea. One day as I was gripping the bars, 
my face straining toward the light, a guard came in and 
told me I had a visitor. I thought it must be Marie. It 
was. 
To get to the visiting room I went down a long cor­
ridor, then down some stairs and, finally, another cor­
ridor. I walked into a very large room brightened by a 
huge bay window. The room was divided. into three 
sections by two large grates that ran the length of the 
room. Between the two grates was a space of eight to 
ten meters which separated the visitors from the prisoners. 
I spotted Marie standing at the opposite end of the room 
with her striped dress and her sun-tanned face. On my 
side of the room there were about ten prisoners, most 
of them Arabs. Marie was surrounded by Moorish women 
and found herself between two visitors: a little, thin­
lipped old woman dressed in black and a fat, bareheaded 
woman who was talking at the top of her voice and 
making lots of gestures. Because of the distance between 
the grates, the visitors and the prisoners were forced to 
speak very loud. When I walked in, the sound of the 
voices echoing off the room's high, bare walls and the 
harsh light pouring out of the sky onto the windows and 
spilling into the room brought on a kind of dizziness. 
My cell was quieter and darker. It took me a few seconds 
to adjust. But eventually I could see each face clearly, 
distinctly in the bright light. I noticed there was a 
73 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
guard sitting at the far end of the passag e between the 
two grates. Most of the Arab prisoners and their families 
had squatted down facing each other. They weren't 
shouting. Despite the commotion, they were managing to 
make themselves heard by talking in very low voices. 
Their subdued murmuring, coming from lower down, 
formed a kind of bass accompaniment to the conversa­
tions crossing above their heads. I took all this in very 
quickly as I made my way toward Marie. Already pressed 
up against the grate, she was smiling her best smile for 
me. I thought she looked very beautiful, but I didn't 
know how to tell her. 
"Well?" she called across to me. "Well, here I am." 
"Are you all right? Do you have everything you want?" 
"Yes, everything." 
We stopped talking and Marie went on smiling. The 
fat woman yelled to the man next to me, her husband 
probably, a tall blond guy with an honest face. It was the 
continua tion of a conversation already under way. 
"Jeanne wouldn't take him," she shouted as loudly as 
she could. "Uh-huh," said the man. "I told her you'd 
take him back when you get out, but she wouldn't take 
him." 
Then it was Marie's turn to shout, that Raymond 
sent his regards, and I said, "Thanks." But my voice was 
drowned out by the man next to me, who asked, "Is he 
all right?" His wife laughed and said, "He's never been 
better." The man on my left, a small young man with 
delicate hands, wasn't saying anything. I noticed that 
74 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
he was across from the little old lady and that they were 
staring intently at each other. But I didn't have time to 
watch them any longer, because Marie shouted to me 
that I had to have hope. I said, "Yes." I was looking at 
her as she said it and I wanted to squeeze her shoulders 
through her dress. I wanted to feel the thin material and 
I didn't really know what else I had to hope for other 
than that. But that was probably what Marie meant, 
because she was still smiling. All I could see was the 
sparkle of her teeth and the little folds of her eyes. She 
shouted again, "You'll get out and we'll get married !" I 
answered, "You think so?" but it was mainly just to say 
something. Then very quickly and still in a very loud 
voice she said yes, that I would be acquitted and that we 
would go swimming again. But the other woman took 
her turn to shout and said that she had left a basket at 
the clerk's office. She was listing all the things she had 
put in it, to make sure they were all there, because they 
cost a lot of money. The young man and his mother 
were still staring at each other. The murmuring of the 
Arabs continued below us. Outside, the light seemed to 
surge up over the bay window. 
I was feeling a little sick and I'd have liked to leave. 
The noise was getting painful. But on the other hand, I 
wanted to make the most of Marie's being there. I don't 
know how much time went by. Marie told me about her 
job and she never stopped smiling. The murmuring, the 
shouting, and the conversations were crossing back and 
forth. The only oasis of silence was next to me where 
75 0 THE STR ANGER 0 
the small young man and the old woman were gazing at 
each other. One by one the Arabs were taken away. 
Almost everyone stopped talking as soon as the first one 
left. The little old woman moved closer to the bars, 
and at the same moment a guard motioned to her son. 
He said "Goodbye, Maman," and she reached between 
two bars to give him a long, slow little wave. 
She left just as another man came in, hat in hand, 
and took her place. Another prisoner was brought in and 
they talked excitedly, but softly, because the room had 
once again grown quiet. They came for the man on my 
right, and his wife said to him without lowering her 
voice, as if she hadn't noticed there was no need to 
shout anymore, "Take care of yourself and be careful." 
Then it was my turn. Marie threw me a kiss. I looked 
back before disappearing. She hadn't moved and her face 
was still pressed against the bars with the same sad, forced 
smile on it. 
Shortly after that was when she wrote to me. And 
the things I've never liked talking about began. Anyway, 
I shouldn't exaggera te, and it was easier for me than 
for others. When I was first imprisoned, the hardest 
thing was that my thoughts were still those of a free man. 
For example, I would suddenly have the urge to be on a 
beach and to walk down to the water. As I imagined the 
sound of the first waves under my feet, my body enter­
ing the water and the sense of relief it would give me, 
all of a sudden I would feel just how closed in I was by 
the walls of my cell. But that only lasted a few months. �THE STRANGE R � 
Afterwards my only thoughts were those of a prisoner. 
I waited for the daily walk, which I took in the courtyard, 
or for a visit from my lawyer. The rest of the time I 
managed pretty well. At the time, I often thought that 
if I had had to live in the trunk of a dead tree, with 
nothing to do but look up at the sky flowering overhead, 
little by little I would have gotten used to it. I would 
have waited for birds to fly by or clouds to mingle, 
just as here I waited to see my lawyer's ties and just as, 
in another world, I used to wait patiently until Saturday 
to hold Marie's body in my arms. Now, as I think back 
on it, I wasn't in a hollow tree trunk. There were others 
worse off than me. Anyway, it was one of Maman's ideas, 
and she often repeated it, that after a while you could 
get used to anything. 
Besides, I usually didn't take things so far. The first 
months were hard. But in fact the effort I had to make 
helped pass the time. For example, I was tormented by 
my desire for a woman. It was only natural; I was young. 
I never thought specifically of Marie. But I thought so 
much about a woman, about women , about all the ones 
I had known, about all the circumstances in which I had 
enjoyed them, that my cell would be filled with their 
faces and crowded with my desires. In one sense, it 
threw me off balance. But in another, it killed time. I 
had ended up making friends with the head guard, who 
used to make the rounds with the kitchen hands at meal­
time. He's the one who first talked to me about women. 
He told me it was the first thing the others complained 
77 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
about. I told him it was the same for me and that I 
thought it was unfair treatment. "But," he said, "that's 
exactly why you're in prison." "What do you mean that's 
why?" "Well, yes-freedom, that's why. They've taken 
away your freedom ." I'd never thought about that. I 
agreed. "It's true," I said. "Otherwise, what would be 
the punishment?" "Right. You see, you understand 
these things. The rest of them don't. But they just end 
up doing it by themselv es." The guar d left after that. 
There were the cigarettes, too. When I entered 
prison, they took away my belt, my shoelaces, my tie, and 
everything I had in my pockets, my cigarettes in par­
ticular. Once I was in my cell, I asked to have them back. 
But I was told I wasn't allowed. The first few days were 
really rough. That may be the thing that was hardest 
for me. I would suck on chips of wood that I broke off 
my bed planks. I walked around nauseated all day long. 
I couldn't understand why they had taken them away 
when they didn't hurt anybody. Later on I realized that 
that too was part of the punishment. But by then I had 
gotten used to not smoking and it wasn't a punishment 
anymore. 
Apart from these annoyances, I wasn't too unhappy. 
Once again the main problem was killing time. Eventu­
ally, once I learned how to remember things, I wasn't 
bored at all. Sometimes I would get to thinking about 
my room, and in my imagination I would start at one 
corner and circle the room, mentally noting everything 
there was on the way. At first it didn't take long. But 0 THE STRANGER 0 
every time I started over, it took a little longer. I would 
remember every piece of furniture; and on every piece of 
furniture, every object; and of every object, all the de­
tails; and of the details themselves -a flake, a crack, or 
a chipped edge-the color and the texture. At the same 
time I would try not to lose the thread of my inventory, 
to make a complete list, so that after a few weeks I 
could spend hours just enumerating the things that 
were in my room. And the more I thought about it, the 
more I dug out of my memory things I had overlooked 
or forgotten. I realized then that a man who had lived 
only one day could easily live for a hundred years in 
prison. He would have enough memories to keep him 
from being bored. In a way, it was an advantage. 
Then there was sleep. At first, I didn't sleep well at 
night and not at all during the day. Little by little, my 
nights got better and I was able to sleep during the day, 
too. In fact, during the last few months I've been sleep­
ing sixteen to eighteen hours a day. That would leave 
me six hours to kill with meals, nature's call, my 
memories, and the story about the Czechoslov akian. 
Between my straw mattress and the bed planks, I 
had actually found an old scrap of newspaper, yellow 
and transpar ent, half-stuck to the canvas. On it was a 
news story, the first part of which was missing, but 
which must have taken place in Czechoslov akia. A 
man had left a Czech village to seek his fortune. Twenty­
five years later, and now rich, he had returned with a 
wife and a child. His mother was running a hotel with 
79 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
his sister in the village where he'd been born. In order 
to surprise them, he had left his wife and child at another 
hotel and gone to see his mother, who didn't recognize 
him when he walked in. As a joke he'd had the idea of 
taking a room. He had shown off his money. During the 
night his mother and his sister had beaten him to death 
with a hammer in order to rob him and had thrown his 
body in the river. The next morning the wife had come 
to the hotel and, without knowing it, gave away the 
traveler's identity. The mother hanged herself. The 
sister threw herself down a well. I must have read that 
story a thousand times. On the one hand it wasn't very 
likely. On the other, it was perfectly natural. Anyway, 
I thought the traveler pretty much deserved what he 
got and that you should never play games. 
So, with all the sleep, my memories, reading my 
crime story, and the alternation of light and darkness, 
time passed. Of course I had read that eventually you 
wind up losing track of time in prison. But it hadn't 
meant much to me when I'd read it. I hadn't understood 
how days could be both long and short at the same time: 
long to live through, maybe, but so drawn out that they 
ended up flowing into one another. They lost their 
0 I h d " d " d " " 'II names. n y t e wor s yester ay an tomorrow st1 
had any meaning for me. 
One day when the guard told me that I'd been in for 
five months, I believed it, but I didn't understand it. 
For me it was one and the same unending day that was 
unfolding in my cell and the same thing I was trying to 
8o 0 THE STRANGER 0 
do. That day, after the guard had left, I looked at my­
self in my tin plate. My reflection seemed to remain 
serious even though I was trying to smile at it. I moved 
the plate around in front of me. I smiled and it still had 
the same sad, stern expression. It was near the end of the 
day, the time of day I don't like talking about, that 
nameless hour when the sounds of evening would rise up 
from every floor of the prison in a cortege of silence. I 
moved closer to the window, and in the last light of day 
I gazed at my reflection one more time. It was still 
serious-and what was surprising about that, since at 
that moment I was too? But at the same time, and for 
the first time in months, I distinctly heard . the sound 
of my own voice. I recognized it as the same one that 
had been ringing in my ears for many long days, and I 
realized that all that time I had been talking to myself. 
Then I remembered what the nurse at Maman's funeral 
said. No, there was no way out, and no one can imagine 
what nights in prison are like. 
81 3 
But I can honestly say that the time from summer to 
summer went very quickly. And I knew as soon as the 
weather turned hot that something new was in store for 
me. My case was set down for the last session of the 
Court of Assizes, and that session was due to end some 
time in June. The trial opened with the sun glaring out­
side. My lawyer had assured me that it wouldn't last more 
than two or three days. "Besides," he had added, "the 
court will be pressed for time. Yours isn't the most im­
portant case of the session. Right after you, there's a 
parricide corning up." 
They carne for me at seven-thirty in the morning and 
I was driven to the courthouse in the prison van. The 
two policemen took me into a small room that smelled 
of darkness. We waited, seated near a door through 
which we could hear voices, shouts, chairs being dragged 
across the Roor, and a lot of commotion which made me 
think of those neighborhood fetes when the hall is 
cleared for dancing after the concert. The policemen 
told me we had to wait for the judges and one of them 
offered me a cigarette, which I turned down. Shortly 0 THE STRANGE R 0 
after that he asked me if I had the "jitters." I said no­
and that, in a way, I was even interested in seeing a trial. 
I'd never had the chance before. "Yeah," said the other 
policeman, "but it gets a little boring after a while." 
A short time later a small bell rang in the room. 
Then they took my handcuffs off. They opened the door 
and led me into the dock. The room was packed. 
Despite the blinds, the sun filtered through in places 
and the air was already stifling. They hadn't opened the 
windows. I sat down with the policemen standing on 
either side of me. It was then that I noticed a row of 
faces in front of me. They were all looking at me : I 
realized that they were the jury. But I can't say what 
distinguished one from another. I had just one im­
pression : I was sitting across from a row of seats on a 
streetcar and all these anonymous passengers were look­
ing over the new arrival to see if they could find some­
thing funny about him. I knew it was a silly idea since it 
wasn't anything funny they were after but a crime. 
There isn't much difference, though-in any case that 
was the idea that came to me. 
I was feeling a little dizzy too, with all those people 
in that stuffy room. I looked around the courtroom again 
but I couldn't make out a single face. I think that at 
first I hadn't realized that all those people were crowding 
in to see me. Usually people didn't pay much attention 
to me. It took some doing on my part to understand that 
I was the cause of all the excitement. I said to the police­
man, "Some crowd!" He told me it was because of the �THE STRANGER � 
press and he pointed to a group of men at a table just 
below the jury box. He said, "That's them." I asked, 
"Who?" and he repeated, "The press." He knew one of 
the reporters, who just then spotted him and was making 
his way toward us. He was an older, friendly man with 
a twisted little grin on his face. He gave the policeman a 
warm handshake. I noticed then that everyone was 
waving and exchanging greetings and talking, as if they 
were in a club where people are glad to find themselves 
among others from the same world. That is how I ex­
plained to myself the strange impression I had of being 
odd man out, a kind of intruder. Yet the reporter turned 
and spoke to me with a smile. He told me that he hoped 
everything would go well for me. I thanked him and 
he added, "You know, we've blown your case up a little. 
Summer is the slow season for the news. And your story 
and the parricide were the only ones worth bothering 
about." Then he pointed in the direction of the group 
he had just left, at a little man who looked like a 
fattened-up weasel. He told me that the man was a 
special correspondent for a Paris paper. "Actually, he 
didn't come because of you. But since they assigned him 
to cover the parricide trial, they asked him to send a dis­
patch about your case at the same time." And again I 
almost thanked him. But I thought that that would be 
ridiculous. He waved cordially, shyly, and left us. We 
waited a few more minutes. 
My lawyer arrived, in his gown, surrounded by lots 
of colleagues. He walked over to the reporters and shook 0 THE STRANGER 0 
some hands. They joked and laughed and looked com­
pletely at ease, until the moment when the bell in the 
court rang. Everyone went back to his place. My lawyer 
walked over to me, shook my hand, and advised me to 
respond brieRy to the questions that would be put to me, 
not to volunteer anything, and to leave the rest to him. 
To my left I heard the sound of a chair being pulled 
out and I saw a tall, thin man dressed in red and wear­
ing a pince-nez who was carefully folding his robe as he 
sat down. That was the prosecutor. A bailiff said, "All 
rise." At the same time two large fans started to whir. 
Three judges, two in black, the third in red, entered with 
files in hand and walked briskly to the rostrum which 
dominated the room. The man in the red gown sat on 
the chair in the middle, set his cap down in front of him, 
wiped his bald little head with a handkerchief, and an­
nounced that the court was now in session. 
The reporters already had their pens in hand. They 
all had the same indifferent and somewhat snide look on 
their faces. One of them, however, much younger than 
the others, wearing gray flannels and a blue tie, had left 
his pen lying in front of him and was looking at me. All 
I could see in his slightly lopsided face were his two 
very bright eyes, which were examining me closely 
without betraying any definable emotion. And I had the 
odd impression of being watched by myself. Maybe it 
was for that reason, and also because I wasn't familiar 
with all the procedures, that I didn't quite understand 
everything that happened next: the drawing of lots for 
Bs 0 THE STR ANGER 0 
the jury; the questions put by the presiding judge to my 
lawyer, the prosecutor, and the jury (each time, the 
jurors' heads would all turn toward the bench at the 
same time); the quick reading of the indictment, in 
which I recognized names of people and places; and 
some more questions to my lawyer. 
Anyway, the presiding judge said he was going to 
proceed with the calling of witnesses. The bailiff read off 
some names that caught my attention. In the middle of 
what until then had been a shapeless mass of spectators, 
I saw them stand up one by one, only to disappear 
again through a side door: the director and the caretaker 
from the home, old Thomas Perez, Raymond, Masson, 
Salamano, and Marie. She waved to me, anxiously. I 
was still feeling surprised that I hadn't seen them before 
when Celeste, the last to be called, stood up. I recog­
nized next to him the little woman from the restaurant, 
with her jacket and her stiff and determined manner. 
She was staring right at me. But I didn't have time to 
think about them, because the presiding judge started 
speaking. He said that the formal proceedings were 
about to begin and that he didn't think he needed to 
remind the public to remain silent. According to him, 
he was there to conduct in an impartial manner the pro­
ceedings of a case which he would consider objectively. 
The verdict returned by the jury would be taken in a 
spirit of justice, and, in any event, he would have the 
courtroom cleared at the slightest disturbance. 
It was getting hotter, and I could see the people in 
86 0 THE STRANGER 0 
the courtroom fanning themselves with newspapers, 
which made a continuous low rustling sound. The 
presiding judge gave a signal and the bailiff brought 
over three fans made of woven straw which the three 
judges started waving immediately. 
My examination began right away. The presiding 
judge questioned me calmly and even, it seemed to me, 
with a hint of cordiality. Once again he had me state 
my name, age, date and place of birth, and although it 
irritated me, I realized it was only natural, because it 
would be a very serious thing to try the wrong man. Then 
he reread the narrative of what I'd done, turning to me 
every few sentences to ask "Is that correct?" Each time 
I answered "Yes, Your Honor," as my lawyer had in­
structed me to do. It took a long time because the 
judge went into minute detail in his narrative. The 
reporters were writing the whole time. I was conscious 
of being watched by the youngest of them and by 
the little robot woman. Everyone on the row of streetcar 
seats was turned directly toward the judge, who coughed, 
leafed through his file, and turned toward me, fanning 
himself. 
He told me that he now had to turn to some ques­
tions that might seem irrelevant to my case but might in 
fact have a significant bearing on it. I knew right away 
he was going to talk about Maman again, and at the 
same time I could feel how much it irritated me. He 
asked me wh) I had put Maman in the home. I answered 
that it was because I didn't have the money to have her o THE STRA NGER 0 
looked after and cared for. He asked me if it had been 
hard on me, and I answered that Marnan and I didn't 
expect anything from each other anymore, or from any­
one else either, and that we had both gotten used to our 
new lives. The judge then said that he didn't want to 
dwell on this point, and he asked the prosecutor if he had 
any further questions. 
The prosecutor had his back half-turned to me, and 
without looking at me he stated that, with the court's 
permission, he would like to know whether I had gone 
back to the spring by myself intending to kill the Arab. 
"No," I said. Well, then, why was I armed and why 
did I return to precisely that spot? I said it just happened 
that way. And the prosecutor noted in a nasty voice, 
"That will be all for now." After that things got a little 
confused, at least for me. But after some conferring, the 
judge announced that the hearing was adjourned until 
the afternoon, at which time the witnesses would be 
heard. 
I didn't even have time to think. I was taken out, 
put into the van, and driven to the prison, where I had 
something to eat. After a very short time, just long 
enough for me to realize I was tired, they carne back 
for me; the whole thing started again, and I found 
myself in the same courtroom, in front of the same 
faces. Only it was much hotter, and as if by some 
miracle each member of the jury, the prosecutor, my 
lawyer, and some of the reporters, too, had been pro­
vided with straw fans. The young reporter and the little 
88 0 THE STRANGER 0 
robot woman were still there. They weren't fanning 
themselves, but they were still watching me without 
saying a word. 
I wiped away the sweat covering my face, and I had 
barely become aware of where I was and what I was 
doing when I heard the director of the home being 
called. He was asked whether Marnan ever complained 
about me, and he said yes but that some of it was just a 
way the residents all had of complaining about their 
relatives. The judge had him clarif y whether she used 
to reproach me for having put her in the horne, and the 
director again said yes. But this time he didn't add any­
thing else. To another question he replied that he had 
been surprised by my calm the day of the funeral. He 
was asked what he meant by "calm." The director then 
looked down at the tips of his shoes and said that I 
hadn't wanted to see Marnan, that I hadn't cried once, 
and that I had left right after the funeral without pa·y­
ing my last respects at her grave. And one other thing 
had surprised him: one of the men who worked for the 
undertaker had told him I didn't know how old Marnan 
was. There was a brief silence, and then the judge 
asked him if he was sure I was the man he had just been 
speaking of. The director didn't understand the question, 
so the judge told him, "It's a formality." He then asked 
the prosecutor if he had any questions to put to the 
witness, and the prosecutor exclaimed, "Oh no, that is 
quite sufficient!" with such glee and with such a tri­
umphant look in my direction that for the first time in o THE STRANGER 0 
years I had this stupid urge to cry, because I could feel 
how much all these people hated me. 
After asking the jury and my lawyer if they had any 
questions, the judge called the caretaker. The same 
ritual was repeated for him as for all the others. As he 
took the stand the caretaker glanced at me and then 
looked away. He answered the questions put to him. He 
said I hadn't wanted to see Maman, that I had smoked 
and slept some, and that I had had some coffee. It was 
then I felt a stirring go through the room and for the 
first time I realized that I was guilty. The caretaker was 
asked to repeat the part about the coffee and the cigarette. 
The prosecutor looked at me with an ironic gleam in his 
eye. At that point my lawyer asked the caretaker if it 
wasn't true that he had smoked a cigarette with me. But 
the prosecutor objected vehemently to this question . 
"Who is on trial here and what kind of tactics are these, 
trying to taint the witnesses for the prosecution in an 
effort to detract from testimony that remains nonethe­
less overwhel ming!" In spite of all that, the judge directed 
the caretaker to answer the question . The old man 
looked embarrassed and said, "I know I was wrong to do 
it. But I couldn't refuse the cigarette when monsieur 
offered it to me." Lastly, I was asked if I had anything to 
add. "Nothing," I said, "except that the witness is right. 
It's true, I did offer him a cigarette ." The caretaker gave 
me a surprised and somehow grateful look. He hesitated 
and then he said that he was the one who offered me 
the coffee. My lawyer was exultant and stated loudly that 0 THE STRANGER 0 
the jury would take note of the fact. But the prosecutor 
shouted over our heads and said, "Indeed, the gentlemen 
of the jury will take note of the fact. And they will 
conclude that a stranger may offer a cup of coffee, but 
that beside the body of the one who brought him into the 
world, a son should have refused it." The caretaker went 
back to his bench. 
When Thomas Perez's turn came, a bailiff had to 
hold him up and help him get to the witness stand. 
Perez said it was really my mother he had known and 
that he had seen me only once, on the day of the funeral. 
He was asked how I had acted that day and he replied, 
"You understand, I was too sad. So I didn't see anything. 
My sadness made it impossible to see anything. Be­
cause for me it was a very great sadness. And I even 
fainted. So I wasn't able to see monsieur." The prosecu­
tor asked him if he had at least seen me cry. Perez 
answered no. The prosecutor in turn said, "The gentle­
men of the jury will take note." But my lawyer got 
angry. He asked Perez in what seemed to be an exag­
gerated tone of voice if he had seen me not cry. Perez 
said, "No." The spectators laughed. And my lawyer, 
rolling up one of his sleeves, said with finality, "Here 
we have a perfect reflection of this entire trial: everything 
is true and nothing is true!" The prosecutor had a blank 
expression on his face, and with a pencil he was poking 
holes in the title page of his case file. 
After a five-minute recess, during which my lawyer 
told me that everything was working out for the best, we 
91 0 THE STRANGER 0 
heard the testimony of Celeste, who was called by the 
defense. "The defense" meant me. Every now and then 
Celeste would glance over in my direction and rotate 
his panama hat in his hands. He was wearing the new 
suit he used to put on to go with me to the races some­
times on Sundays. But I think he must not have been 
able to get his collar on, because he only had a brass 
stud keeping his shirt fastened. He was asked if I was 
a customer of his and he said, "Yes, but he was also a 
friend"; what he thought of me, and he answered that I 
was a man; what he meant by that, and he stated that 
everybody knew what that meant; if he had noticed that 
I was ever withdrawn, and all he would admit was that 
I didn't speak unless I had something to say. The prosecu­
tor asked him if I kept up with my bill. Celeste laughed 
and said, "Between us those were just details." He was 
again asked what he thought about my crime. He put his 
hands on the edge of the box, and you could tell he had 
something prepared. He said, "The way I see it, it's bad 
luck. Everybody knows what bad luck is. It leaves you 
defenseless. And there it is! The way I see it, it's bad 
luck." He was about to go on, but the judge told him 
that that would be all and thanked him. Celeste was a 
little taken aback. But he stated that he had more to say. 
He was asked to be brief. He again repeated that it was 
bad luck. And the judge said, "Yes, fine. But we are here 
to judge just this sort of bad luck. Thank you." And 
as if he had reached the end of both his knowledge and 
his goodwill, Celeste then turned toward me. It looked 
92 0 THE STRANGER 0 
to me as if his eyes were glistening and his lips were 
trembling. He seemed to be asking me what else he 
could do. I said nothing; I made no gesture of any kind, 
but it was the first time in my life I ever wanted to kiss 
a man. The judge again instructed him to step down. 
Celeste went and sat among the spectators. He sat there 
throughout the entire trial, leaning forward, his elbows on 
his knees, the panama hat in his hands, listening to 
everything that was said. 
Marie entered. She had put on a hat and she was still 
beautiful. But I liked her better with her hair loose. 
From where I was sitting, I could just make out the 
slight fullness of her breasts, and I recognized the little 
pout of her lower lip. She seemed very nervous. Right 
away she was asked how long she had known me. She 
said since the time she worked in our office. The judge 
wanted to know what her relation to me was. She said 
she was my friend. To another question she answered 
yes, it was true that she was supposed to marry me. Flip­
ping through a file, the prosecutor asked her bluntly 
when our "liaison" had beg un. She indicated the date. 
The prosecutor remarked indifferently that if he was 
not mistaken, that was the day after Maman died. Then 
in a slightly ironic tone he said that he didn't mean to 
dwell on such a delicate matter, and that he fully ap­
preciated Marie's misgivings, but (and here his tone 
grew firmer) that he was duty bound to go beyond 
propriety. So he asked Marie to describe briefly that day 
when I had first known her. Marie didn't want to, but 
93 0 THE STRA NGER 0 
at the prosecutor's insistence, she went over our swim, 
the movies, and going back to my place. The prosecutor 
said that after Marie had given her statements to the 
examining magistrate, he had consulted the movie list­
ings for that day. He added that Marie herself would tell 
the court what film was showing. In an almost expression­
less voice she did in fact tell the court that it was a 
Fernandel film. By the time she had finished there was 
complete silence in the courtroom. The prosecutor then 
rose and, very gravely and with what struck me as real 
emotion in his voice, his finger pointing at me, said 
slowly and distinctly, "Gentlemen of the jury, the day 
after his mother's death, this man was out swimming, 
starting up a dubious liaison, and going to the movies, a 
comedy, for laughs. I have nothing further to say." He 
sat down in the still-silent courtroom. But all of a 
sudden Marie began to sob, saying it wasn't like that, 
there was more to it, and that she was being made to say 
the opposite of what she was thinking, that she knew me 
and I hadn't done anything wrong. But at a signal from 
the judge, the bailiff ushered her out and the trial pro­
ceeded. 
Hardly anyone listened after that when Masson testi­
fied that I was an honest man "and I'd even say a 
decent one." Hardly anyone listened to Salamano either, 
when he recalled how I had been good to his dog and 
when he answered a question about my mother and me 
by saying that I had run out of things to say to Maman 
and that was why I'd put her in the home. "You must 
94 0 THE STR AN':>ER 0 
understand," Salamano kept saying, "you must under­
stand." But no one seemed to understa nd. He was 
ushered out. 
Next came Raymond, who was the last witness. He 
waved to me and all of a sudden, he blurted out that I was 
innocent. But the judge advised him that he was being 
asked not for judgments but for facts. He was instructed 
to wait for the questions before responding. He was 
directed to state precisely what his relations with the 
victim were. Raymond took this opportunity to say that 
he was the one the victim hated ever since he had hit 
the guy's sister. Nevertheless, the judge asked him 
whether the victim hadn't also had reason to hate me. 
Raymond said that my being at the beach was just 
chance. The prosecutor then asked him how it was that 
the letter that set the whole drama in motion had been 
written by me. Raymond responded that it was just 
chance. The prosecutor retorted that chance already had 
a lot of misdeeds on its conscience in this case. He 
wanted to know if it was just by chance that I hadn't 
intervened when Raymond had beaten up his girlfriend, 
just by chance that I had acted as a witness at the police 
station, and again just by chance that my statements on 
that occasion had proved to be so convenient. Finishing 
up, he asked Raymond how he made his living, and 
when Raymond replied "warehouse guard," the prosecu­
tor informed the jury that it was common knowledge that 
the witness practiced the profession of procurer. I was 
his friend and accomplice. They had before them the 
95 0 THE STRANGER 0 
basest of crimes, a crime made worse than sordid by the 
fact that they were dealing with a monster, a man with­
out morals. Raymond wanted to defend himself and my 
lawyer objected, but they were instructed that they must 
let the prosecutor finish. "I have little to add," the prose­
cutor said. "Was he your friend?" he asked Raymond. 
"Y " R d "d "W I " Th es, aymon sa1 . e were pas. e prosecutor 
then put the same question to me, and I looked at Ray­
mond, who returned my gaze. I answered, "Yes." The 
prosecutor then turned to the jury and declared, "The 
same man who the day after his mother died was in­
dulging in the most shameful debauchery killed a man 
for the most trivial of reasons and did so in order to 
settle an affair of unspeakable vice." 
He then sat down. But my lawyer had lost his 
patience, and, raising his hands so high that his sleeves 
fell, revealing the creases of a starched shirt, he shouted, 
"Come now, is my client on trial for burying his mother 
or for killing a man?" The spectators laughed. But the 
prosecutor rose to his feet again, adjusted his robe, and 
declared that only someone with the naivete of his 
esteemed colleague could fail to appreciate that between 
these two sets of facts there existed a profound, funda­
mental, and tragic relationsh ip. "Indeed," he loudly 
exclaimed, "I accuse this man of burying his mother 
With crime in his heart!" This pronouncement seemed 
to have a strong effect on the people in the courtroom. 
My lawyer shrugged his shoulders and wiped the sweat 
from his brow. But he looked shaken himself, and I 
realized that things weren't going well for me. 
96 0 THE STRANGER o 
The trial was adjourned . As I was leaving the court­
house on my way back to the van, I recognized for a 
brief moment the smell and color of the summer eve­
ning. In the darkness of my mobile prison I could make 
out one by one, as if from the depths of my exhaustion, 
all the familiar sounds of a town I loved and of a cer­
tain time of day when I used to feel happy. The cries 
of the newspaper vendors in the already languid air, the 
last few birds in the square, the shouts of the sandwich 
sellers, the screech of the streetcars turning sharply 
through the upper town, and that hum in the sky before 
night engulfs the port: all this mapped out for me a 
route I knew so well before going to prison and which 
now I traveled blind. Yes, it was the hour when, a long 
time ago, I was perfectly content. What awaited me 
back then was always a night of easy, dreamless sleep. 
And yet something had changed, since it was back to 
my cell that I went to wait for the next day . . . as if 
familiar paths traced in summer skies could lead as 
easily to prison as to the sleep of the innocent. 
97 4 
Even in the prisoner's dock it's always interesting to hear 
people talk about you. And during the summations by 
the prosecutor and my lawyer, there was a lot said about 
me, maybe more about me than about my crime. But 
were their two speeches so different after all? My lawyer 
raised his arms and pleaded guilty, but with an explana­
tion. The prosecutor waved his hands and proclaimed my 
guilt, but without an explanation. One thing bothered me 
a little, though. Despite everything that was on my mind, 
I felt like intervening every now and then, but my lawyer 
kept telling me, "Just keep quiet-it won't do your case 
any good." In a way, they seemed to be arguing the 
case as if it had nothing to do with me. Everything was 
happening without my participation . My fate was being 
decided without anyone so much as asking my opinion. 
There were times when I felt like breaking in on all of 
them and saying, "Wait a minute! Who's the accused 
here? Being the accused counts for something. And I 
have something to say!" But on second thought, I didn't 
have anything to say. Besides, I have to admit that what­
ever interest you can get people to take in you doesn't 0 THE STRANGER 0 
last very long. For example, I got bored very quickly 
with the prosecutor's speech. Only bits and pieces-a 
gesture or a long but isolated tirade-caugh t my atten­
tion or aroused my interest. 
The gist of what he was saying, if I understood him 
correctly, was that my crime was premeditated. At least 
that is what he tried to show. As he himself said, "I will 
prove it to you, gentlemen, and I will prove it in two 
ways. First, in the blinding clarity of the facts, and 
second, in the dim light cast by the mind of this 
criminal soul." He reminded the court of my insensi­
tivity; of my ignorance when asked Marnan1s age; of my 
swim the next day-with a woman; of the Fernandel 
movie; and finally of my taking Marie horne with me. It 
took me a few minutes to understand the last part be­
cause he kept saying "his mistress" and to me she was 
Marie. Then he carne to the business with Raymon d. I 
thought his way of viewing the events had a certain 
consistency. What he was saying was plausible. I had 
agreed with Raymond to write the letter in order to lure 
his mistress and submit her to mistreatment by a man 
"of doubtful morality." I had provoked Raymond's ad­
versaries at the beach. Raymond had been wounded. I 
had asked him to give me his gun. I had gone back 
alone intending to use it. I had shot the Arab as I 
planned. I had waited. And to make sure I had done the 
job right, I fired four more shots, calmly, point-blank­
thoughtfully, as it were. 
"And there you have it, gentlemen," said the prosecu-
99 0 THE STRANGER 0 
tor. "I have retraced for you the course of events which 
led this man to kill with full knowledge of his actions. 
I stress this point," he said, "for this is no ordinary 
murder, no thoughtless act for which you might find 
mitigating circumstances. This man, gentlemen, this 
man is intelligent. You heard him, didn't you? He knows 
how to answer. He knows the value of words. And no 
one can say that he acted without realizing what he 
was doing." 
I was listening, and I could hear that I was being 
judged intelligent. But I couldn't quite understand how 
an ordinary man's good qualities could become crushing 
accusations against a guilty man. At least that was what 
struck me, and I stopped listening to the prosecutor until 
I heard him say, "Has he so much as expressed any re­
morse? Never, gentlemen. Not once during the pre­
liminary hearing s did this man show emotion over his 
heinous offense." At that point, he turned in my direc­
tion, pointed his finger at me, and went on attacking me 
without my ever really understanding why. Of course, I 
couldn't help admitting that he was right. I didn't feel 
much remorse for what I'd done. But I was surprised by 
how relentless he was. I would have liked to have tried 
explaining to him cordially, almost affectionately, that I 
had never been able to truly feel remorse for anything. 
My mind was always on what was coming next, today 
or tomorrow. But naturally, given the position I'd been 
put in, I couldn't talk to anyone in that way. I didn't 
have the right to show any feeling or goodwill. And I 
IOO 0 THE STRANGER 0 
tried to listen again, because the prosecutor started talk­
ing about my soul. 
He said that he had peered into it and that he had 
found nothing, gentlemen of the jury. He said the truth 
was that I didn't have a soul and that nothing human , 
not one of the moral principles that govern men's hearts, 
was within my reach. "Of course," he added, "we cannot 
blame him for this. We cannot complain that he lacks 
what it was not in his power to acquire. But here in this 
court the wholly negative virtue of tolerance must give 
way to the sterner but loftier virtue of justice. Espe­
cially when the emptiness of a man's heart becomes, as 
we find it has in this man, an abyss threatening to 
swallow up society." It was then that he talked about 
my attitude toward Maman . He repeated what he had 
said earlier in the proceedings. But it went on much 
longer than when he was talking about my crime-so 
long, in fact, that finally all I was aware of was how hot a 
morning it was. At least until the prosecutor stopped and 
after a short silence continued in a very low voice filled 
with conviction : "Tomorrow, gentlemen, this same court 
is to sit in judgment of the most monstrous of crimes: the 
murder of a father." According to him, the imagination re­
coiled before such an odious offense. He went so far 
as to hope that human justice would mete out punish­
ment unBinchingly. But he wasn't afraid to say it: my 
callousness inspired in him a horror nearly greater than 
that which he felt at the crime of parricide. And also 
according to him, a man who is morally guilty of killing 
IOI 0 THE STR ANGER 0 
his mother severs himself from society in the same way 
as the man who raises a murderous hand against the 
father who begat him. In any case, the one man paved 
the way for the deeds of the other, in a sense fore­
shadowed and even legitimized them. "I am convinced, 
gentlemen," he added, raising his voice, "that you will 
not think it too bold of me if I suggest to you that the 
man who is seated in the dock is also guilty of the murder 
to be tried in this court tomorrow. He must be punished 
accordingly." Here the prosecutor wiped his face, which 
was glistening with sweat. He concluded by saying that 
his duty was a painful one but that he would carry it 
out resolutely. He stated that I had no place in a society 
whose most fundamental rules I ignored and that I could 
not appeal to the same human heart whose elementary 
response I knew nothing of. "I ask you for this man's 
head," he said, "and I do so with a heart at ease. For 
if in the course of what has been a long career I have 
had occasion to call for the death penalty, never as 
strongly as today have I felt this painf ul duty made 
easier, lighter, clearer by the certain knowledge of a 
sacred imperative and by the horror I feel when I look 
into a man's face and all I see is a monster." 
When the prosecutor returned to his seat, there was a 
rather long silence. My head was spinning with heat and 
astonishment. The presiding judge cleared his throat and 
in a very low voice asked me if I had anything to add. I 
stood up, and since I did wish to speak, I said, almost at 
random, in fact, that I never intended to kill the Arab. 
l02 �THE STRANGER � 
The judge replied by saying that at least that was an 
assertion, that until then he hadn't quite grasped the 
nature of my defense, and that before hearing from my 
lawyer he would be happy to have me state precisely the 
motives for my act. Fumbling a little with my words and 
realizing how ridiculous I sounded, I blurted out that 
it was because of the sun. People laughed. My lawyer 
threw up his hands, and immediately after that he was 
given the floor. But he stated that it was late and that he 
would need several hours. He requested that the trial be 
reconvened in the afternoon. The court granted his 
motion. 
That afternoon the big fans were still churning 
the thick air in the courtroom and the jurors' brightly 
colored fans were all moving in unison. It seemed to me 
as if my lawyer's summation would never end. At one 
point, though, I listened, because he was saying, "It is 
true I killed a man." He went on like that, saying "I" 
whenever he was speaking about me. I was completely 
taken aback. I leaned over to one of the guards and 
asked him why he was doing that. He told me to keep 
quiet, and a few seconds later he added, "All lawyers 
do it." I thought it was a way to exclude me even further 
from the case, reduce me to nothing, and, in a sense, sub­
stitute himself for me. But I think I was already very 
far removed from that courtroom. Besides, my lawyer 
seemed ridiculous to me. He rushed through a plea of 
provocation, and then he too talked about my soul. But 
to me he seemed to be a lot less talented than the 
103 0 THE STRANGER 0 
prosecutor. "1, too," he said, "have peered into this man's 
soul, but unlike the esteemed representative of the 
government prosecutor's office, I did see something there, 
and I can assure you that I read it like an open book." 
What he read was that I was an honest man, a steadily 
employed, tireless worker, loyal to the firm that employed 
him, well liked, and sympathetic to the misfortunes of 
others. To him, I was a model son who had supported 
his mother as long as he could. In the end I had hoped 
that a horne for the aged would give the old woman the 
comfort that with my limited means I could not provide 
for her. "Gentlemen ," he added, "I am amazed that so 
much has been made of this horne. For after all, if it 
were necessary to prove the usefulness and importance 
of such institutions, all one would have to say is that 
it is the state itself which subsidizes them." The only 
thing is, he didn't say anything about the funeral, and I 
thought that that was a glaring omission in his sum­
mation. But all the long speeches, all the interminable 
days and hours that people had spent talking about my 
soul, had left me with the impression of a colorless swirl­
ing river that was making me dizzy. 
In the end, all I remember is that while my lawyer 
went on talking, I could hear through the expanse of 
chambers and courtrooms an ice cream vendor blowing 
his tin trumpet out in the street. I was assailed by 
memories of a life that wasn't mine anymore, but one 
in which I'd found the simplest and most lasting joys: 
the smells of summer, the part of town I loved, a certain 
evening sky, Marie's dresses and the way she laughed. 
104 0 THE STRANGER 0 
The utter pointlessness of whatever I was doing there 
seized me by the throat, and all I wanted was to get it 
over with and get back to my cell and sleep. I barely 
even heard when my lawyer, wrapping up, exclaimed 
that the jury surely would not send an honest, hard­
working man to his death because he had lost control of 
himself for one moment, and then he asked them to find 
extenuating circumstances for a crime for which I was 
already suffering the most agonizing of punishment s­
eternal remorse. Court was adjourned and my lawyer 
sat back down. He looked exhausted. But his colleagues 
came over to shake his hand. I heard: "That was 
brilliant!" One of them even appealed to me as a wit­
ness. "Wasn't it?" he said. I agreed, but my congratula­
tions weren't sincere, because I was too tired. 
Meanwhile, the sun was getting low outside and it 
wasn't as hot anymore. From what street noises I could 
hear, I sensed the sweetness of evening coming on. 
There we all were, waiting. And what we were all wait­
ing for really concerned only me. I looked around the 
room again. Everything was the same as it had been the 
first day. My eyes met those of the little robot woman 
and the reporter in the gray jacket. That reminded me 
that I hadn't tried to catch Marie's eye once during the 
whole trial. I hadn't forgotten about her; I'd just had too 
much to do. I saw her sitting between Celeste and Ray­
mond. She made a little gesture as if to say "At last." 
There was a worried little smile on her face. But my 
heart felt nothing, and I couldn't even return her smile. 
The judges came back in. Very quickly a series of 
105 0 THE STRA NGER 0 
questions was read to the jury. I heard "guilty of 
murder" . . . "premeditated" . . . "extenuating cir­
cumstances ." The jurors filed out, and I was taken to 
the little room where I had waited before. My lawyer 
joined me. He was very talkative and spoke to me more 
confidently and cordially than he ever had before. He 
thought that everything would go well and that I would 
get off with a few years in prison or at hard labor. I 
asked him whether he thought there was any chance of 
overturning the verdict if it was unfavorable. He said 
no. His tactic had been not to file any motions so as not 
to antagonize the jury. He explained to me that verdicts 
weren't set aside just like that, for nothing. That seemed 
obvious and I accepted his logic. Looking at it objectively, 
it made perfect sense. Otherwise there would be too 
much pointless paperwork. "Anyway," he said, "we can 
always appeal. But I'm convinced that the outcome will 
be favorable." 
We waited a long time-almost three-quarter s of an 
hour, I think. Then a bell rang. My lawyer left me, say­
ing, "The foreman of the jury is going to announce the 
verdict. You'll only be brought in for the passing of 
sentence." Doors slammed. People were running on stairs 
somewhere, but I couldn't tell if they were nearby or far 
away. Then I heard a muffied voice reading something in 
the courtroom. When the bell rang again, when the 
door to the dock opened, what rose to meet me was the 
silence in the courtroom, silence and the strange feeling 
I had when I noticed that the young reporter had turned 
zo6 0 THE STRANGER 0 
his eyes away. I didn't look in Marie's direction. I didn't 
have time to, because the presiding judge told me in 
bizarre language that I was to have my head cut off in a 
public square in the name of the French people. Then 
it seemed to me that I suddenly knew what was on 
everybody's face. It was a look of considera tion, I'm sure. 
The policemen were very gentle with me. The lawyer 
put his hand on my wrist. I wasn't thinking about any­
thing anymore. But the presiding judge asked me if I 
had anything to say. I thought about it. I said, "No." 
That's when they took me away. 5 
For the third time I've refused to see the chaplain. I 
don't have anything to say to him; I don't feel like 
talking, and I'll be seeing him soon enough as it is. All 
I care about right now is escaping the machine ry of 
justice, seeing if there's any way out of the inevitable. 
They've put me in a different cell. From this one, when 
I'm stretched out on my bunk, I see the sky and that's 
all I see. I spend my days watching how the dwindling 
of color turns day into night. Lying here, I put my 
hands behind my head and wait. I can't count the times 
I've wondered if there have ever been any instances of 
condemned men escaping the relentless machinery, dis­
appearing before the execution or breaking through the 
cordon of police. Then I blame myself every time for 
not having paid enough attention to accounts of execu­
tions. A man should always take an interest in those 
things. You never know what might happen. I'd read 
stories in the papers like everybody else. But there must 
have been books devoted to the subject that I'd never 
been curious enough to look into. Maybe I would have 
found some accounts of escapes in them. I might have 
zo8 0 THE STRANGER 0 
discovered that in at least one instance the wheel had 
stopped, that in spite of all the unrelenting calculation, 
chance and luck had, at least once, changed something. 
Just once! In a way, I think that would have been 
enough. My heart would have taken over from there. 
The papers were always talking about the debt owed to 
society. According to them, it had to be paid. But that 
doesn't speak to the imagination. What really counted 
was the possibility of escape, a leap to freedom, out of 
the implacable ritual, a wild run for it that would give 
whatever chance for hope there was. Of course, hope 
meant being cut down on some street comer, as you ran 
like mad, by a random bullet. But when I really thought 
it through , nothing was going to allow me such a luxury. 
Everything was against it; I would just be caught up in 
the machinery again. 
Despite my willingness to understand, I just couldn't 
accept such arrogant certainty. Because, after all, there 
really was something ridiculously out of proportion be­
tween the verdict such certainty was based on and the 
imperturbable march of events from the moment the 
verdict was announced. The fact that the sentence had 
been read at eight o'clock at night and not at five o'clock, 
the fact that it could have been an entirely different 
one, the fact that it had been decided by men who change 
their underwear, the fact that it had been handed down 
in the name of some vague notion called the French (or 
German, or Chinese) people-all of it seemed to de­
tract from the seriousness of the decision. I was forced 
109 0 THE STRANGER 0 
to admit, however, that from the moment it had been 
passed its· consequences became as real and as serious 
as the wall against which I pressed the length of my 
body. 
At times like this I remembered a story Maman used 
to tell me about my father. I never knew him. Maybe 
the only thing I did know about the man was the story 
Maman would tell me back then : he'd gone to watch a 
murderer be executed. Just the thought of going had 
made him sick to his stomach. But he went anyway, 
and when he came back he spent half the morning 
throwing up. I remember feeling a little disgusted by 
him at the time. But now I understood, it was perfectly 
normal. How had I not seen that there was nothing 
more important than an execution, and that when you 
come right down to it, it was the only thing a man 
could truly be interested in? If I ever got out of this 
prison I would go and watch every execution there was. 
But I think it was a mistake even to consider the pos­
sibility. Because at the thought that one fine morning I 
would find myself a free man standing behind a cordon 
of police--on the outside, as it were-a t the thought 
of being the spectator who comes to watch and then can 
go and throw up afterwards, a wave of poisoned joy rose 
in my throat. But I wasn't being reasonable. It was a 
mistake to let myself get carried away by such imaginings, 
because the next minute I would get so cold that I would 
curl up into a ball under my blanket and my teeth would 
be chattering and I couldn't make them stop. 
IIO o THE STRANGER o 
But naturally, you can't always be reasonable. At 
other times, for instance, I would make up new laws. I 
would reform the penal code. I'd realized that the most 
importa nt thing was to give the condemned man a 
chance. Even one in a thousand was good enough to 
set things right. So it seemed to me that you could come 
up with a mixture of chemicals that if ingested by the 
patient (that's the word I'd use: "patient") would kill 
him nine times out of ten. But he would know this­
that would be the one condition. For by giving it some 
hard thought, by considering the whole thing calmly, I 
could see that the trouble with the guillotine was that 
you had no chance at all, absolutely none. The fact was 
that it had been decided once and for all that the patient 
was to die. It was an open-and-shut case, a fixed arrange­
ment, a tacit agreement that there was no question of 
going back on. If by some extraordinary chance the 
blade failed, they would just start over. So the thing 
that bothered me most was that the condemned man 
had to hope the machine would work the first time. And 
I say that's wrong. And in a way I was right. But in 
another way I was forced to admit that that was the 
whole secret of good organization. In other words, the 
condemned man was forced into a kind of moral col­
laboratio n. It was in his interest that everyth ing go off 
without a hitch. 
I was also made to see that until that moment I'd had 
mistaken ideas about these things. For a long time I 
believed-and I don't know why-th at to get to the 
I I I 0 THE STRANGER 0 
guillotine you had to climb stairs onto a scaffold. I think 
it was because of the French Revolution-! mean, be­
cause of everything I'd been taught or shown about it. 
But one morning I remembered seeing a photograph that 
appeared in the papers at the time of a much-talked-about 
execution. In reality, the machine was set up right on 
the ground, as simple as you please. It was much 
narrower than I'd thought. It was funny I'd never 
noticed that before. I'd been struck by this picture be­
cause the guillotine looked like such a precision in­
strument, perfect and gleaming. You always get exag­
gerated notions of things you don't know anything about. 
I was made to see that contrary to what I thought, 
everything was very simple: the guillotine is on the 
same level as the man approaching it. He walks up to 
it the way you walk up to another pers on. That bothered 
me too. Mounting the scaffold, going right up into the 
sky, was something the imagination could hold on to. 
vVhereas, once again, the machine destroyed everything: 
you were killed discreetly, with a little shame and with 
great precision. 
There were two other things I was always thinking 
about: the dawn and my appeal. I would reason with 
myself, though, and try not to think about them any­
more. I would stretch out, look at the sky, and force 
myself to find something interesting about it. It would 
turn green: that was evening. I would make another 
effort to divert my thoughts. I would listen to my heart­
beat. I couldn't imagine that this sound which had been 
with me for so long could ever stop. I've never really 
I 12 0 THE STRANGER 0 
had much of an imagination. But still I would try to 
picture the exact moment when the beating of my 
heart would no longer be going on inside my head. But 
it was no use. The dawn or my appeal would still be 
there. I would end up telling myself that the most 
rational thing was not to hold myself back. 
They always came at dawn, I knew that. And so I 
spent my nights waiting for that dawn. I've never liked 
being surprised. If something is going to happen to me, 
I want to be there. That's why I ended up sleeping only 
a little bit during the day and then, all night long, waited 
patiently for the first light to show on the pane of sky. 
The hardest time was that uncertain hour when I knew 
they usually set to work. After midnight, I would wait 
and watch .. My ears had never heard so many noises or 
picked up such small sounds. One thing I can say, 
though, is that in a certain way I was lucky that whole 
time, since I never heard footsteps. Maman used to say 
that you can always find something to be happy about. 
In my prison, when the sky turned red and a new day 
slipped into my cell, I found out that she was right. 
Because I might just as easily have heard footsteps and 
my heart could have burst. Even though I would rush 
to the door at the slightest shuffie, even though, with 
my ear pressed to the wood, I would wait frantically 
until I heard the sound of my own breathing, terrified 
to find it so hoarse, like a dog's panting, my heart would 
not burst after all, and I would have gained another 
twenty-four hours. 
All day long there was the thought of my appeal. I 
I I 3 0 THE STR ANGER 0 
think I got everything out of it that I could. I would 
assess my holdings and get the maximum return on my 
thoughts. I would always begin by assuming the worst: 
my appeal was denied. "Well, so I'm going to die." 
Sooner than other people will, obviously. But everybody 
knows life isn't worth living. Deep down I knew per­
fectly well that it doesn't much matter whether you 
die at thirty or at seventy, since in either case other 
men and women will naturally go on living-and for 
thousands of years. In fact, nothing could be clearer. 
Whether it was now or twenty years from now, I would 
still be the one dying. At that point, what would disturb 
my train of thought was the terrifying leap I would feel 
my heart take at the idea of having twenty more years of 
life ahead of me. But I simply had to stifle it by im­
agining what I'd be thinking in twenty years when it 
would all come down to the same thing anyway. Since 
we're all going to die, it's obvious that when and 
how don't matter. Therefore (and the difficult thing 
was not to lose sight of all the reasoning that went into 
this "therefore"), I had to accept the rejection of my 
appeal. 
Then and only then would I have the right, so to 
speak-would I give myself permission , as it were-to 
consider the alternative hypothe sis: I was pardoned. The 
trouble was that I would somehow have to cool the hot 
blood that would suddenly surge through my body and 
sting my eyes with a delirious joy. It would take all my 
strength to quiet my heart, to be rational. In order to 
114 0 THE STRANGER 0 
make my resignation to the first hypothesis more plau­
sible, I had to be level-headed about this one as well. 
If I succeeded, I gained an hour of calm. That was 
something anyway. 
It was at one such moment that I once again refused 
to see the chaplain . I was lying down, and I could tell 
from the golden glow in the sky that evening was 
coming on. I had just denied my appeal and I could 
feel the steady pulse of my blood circulating inside me. 
I didn't need to see the chaplain. For the first time in 
a long time I thought about Marie. The days had been 
long since she'd stopped writing. That evening I thought 
about it and told myself that maybe she had gotten 
tired of being the girlfriend of a condemned man. It also 
occurred to me that maybe she was sick, or dead. These 
things happen. How was I to know, since apart from our 
two bodies, now separated, there wasn't anything to 
keep us together or even to remind us of each other? 
Anyway, after that, remembering Marie meant nothing 
to me. I wasn't interested in her dead. That seemed 
perfectly normal to me, since I understood very well 
that people would forget me when I was dead. They 
wouldn't have anything more to do with me. I wasn't 
even able to tell myself that it was hard to think those 
things. 
It was at that exact moment that the chaplain carne 
in. When I saw him I felt a little shudder go through me. 
He noticed it and told me not to be afraid. I told him 
that it wasn't his usual time. He replied that it was just 
I I 5 0 THE STRANGER 0 
a friendly visit and had nothing to do with my appeal, 
which he knew nothing about. He sat down on my bunk 
and invited me to sit next to him. I refused. All the 
same, there was something very gentle about him. 
He sat there for a few seconds, leaning forward, 
with his elbows on his knees, looking at his hands. They 
were slender and sinewy and they reminded me of two 
nimble animals. He slowly rubbed one against the other. 
Then he sat there, leaning forward like that, for so long 
that for an instant I seemed to forget he was there. 
But suddenly he raised his head and looked straight 
at me. "Why have you refused to see me?" he asked. I 
said that I didn't believe in God. He wanted to know if 
I was sure and I said that I didn't see any reason to ask 
myself that question : it seemed unimporta nt. He then 
leaned back against the wall, hands Bat on his thighs. 
Almost as if .it wasn't me he was talking to, he remarked 
that sometimes we think we're sure when in fact we're 
not. I didn't say anything. He looked at me and asked, 
"What do you think?" I said it was possible. In any 
case, I may not have been sure about what really did 
interest me, but I was absolutely sure about what didn't. 
And it just so happened that what he was talking about 
didn't interest me. 
He looked away and without moving asked me if I 
wasn't talking that way out of extreme despair. I ex­
plained to him that I wasn't despera te. I was just afraid, 
which was only natural. "Then God can help you," he 
said. "Every man I have known in your position has 
II6 0 THE STR ANGER o 
turned to Him." I acknowledged that that was their right. 
It also meant that they must have had the time for it. As 
for me, I didn't want anybody's help, and I just didn't 
have the time to interest myself in what didn't interest 
me. 
At that point he threw up his hands in annoyance 
but then sat forward and smoothed out the folds of his 
cassock. When he had finished he started in again, ad­
dressing me as "my friend." If he was talking to me this 
way, it wasn't because I was condemned to die; the way 
he saw it, we were all condemned to die. But I interrupted 
him by saying that it wasn't the same thing and that be­
sides, it wouldn't be a consolation anyway. "Certainly," 
he agreed. "But if you don't die today, you'll die to­
morrow, or the next day. And then the same question 
will arise. How will you face that terrifying ordeal?" I 
said I would face it exactly as I was facing it now. 
At that he stood up and looked me straight in the 
eye. It was a game I knew well. I played it a lot with 
Emmanuel and Celeste and usually they were the ones 
who looked away. The chaplain knew the game well 
too, I could tell right away: his gaze never faltered. 
And his voice didn't falter, either, when he said, "Have 
you no hope at all? And do you really live with the 
thought that when you die, you die, and nothing re­
mains?" "Yes," I said. 
Then he lowered his head and sat back down. He 
told me that he pitied me. He thought it was more than 
a man could bear. I didn't feel anything except that he 
II7 0 THE STR ANGER 0 
was beginning to annoy me. Then I turned away and 
went and stood under the skylight. I leaned my shoulder 
against the wall. Without really following what he 
was saying, I heard him start asking me questions 
again. He was talking in an agitated, urgent voice. I 
could see that he was genuinely upset, so I listened 
more closely. 
He was expressing his certainty that my appeal would 
be granted, but I was carrying the burden of a sin from 
which I had to free myself. According to him, human 
justice was nothing and divine justice was everything. I 
pointed out that it was the former that had condemned 
me. His response was that it hadn't washed away my sin 
for all that. I told him I didn't know what a sin was. 
All they had told me was that I was guilty. I was 
guilty, I was paying for it, and nothing more could be 
asked of me. At that point he stood up again, and the 
thought occurred to me that in such a narrow cell, if 
he wanted to move around he didn't have many options. 
He could either sit down or stand up. 
I was staring at the ground. He took a step toward me 
and stopped, as if he didn't dare come any closer. He 
looked at the sky through the bars. "You're wrong, my 
son," he said. "More could be asked of you. And it may 
be asked." "And what's that?" "You could be asked to 
see." "See what?' 
The priest gazed around my cell and answered in a 
voice that sounded very weary to me. "Every stone here 
sweats with suffering, I know that. I have never looked 
II8 0 THE STRANGER 0 
at them without a feeling of anguish. But deep in my 
heart I know that the most wretched among you have 
seen a divine face emerge from their darkness. That is 
the face you are asked to see." 
This perked me up a little. I said I had been looking 
at the stones in these walls for months. There wasn't 
anything or anyone in the world I knew better. Maybe 
at one time, way back, I had searched for a face in them. 
But the face I was looking for was as bright as the sun 
and the flame of desire-and it belonged to Marie. I had 
searched for it in vain. Now it was all over. And in any 
case, I'd never seen anything emerge from any sweat­
ing stones. 
The chaplain looked at me with a kind of sadness. I 
now had my back flat against the wall, and light was 
streaming over my forehead. He muttered a few words 
I didn't catch and abruptly asked if he could embrace 
me. "No," I said. He turned and walked over to the wall 
and slowly ran his hand over it. "Do you really love this 
earth as much as all that?" he murmured. I didn't 
answer. 
He stood there with his back to me for quite a long 
time. His presence was grating and oppressive . I was 
just about to tell him to go, to leave me alone, when all 
of a sudden, turning toward me, he burst out, "No, I 
refuse to believe you! I know that at one time or another 
you've wished for another life." I said of course I had, 
but it didn't mean any more than wishing to be rich, 
to be able to swim faster, or to have a more nicely shaped 
I 19 0 THE ST RANGER 0 
mouth. It was all the same. But he stopped me and 
wanted to know how I pictured this other life. Then I 
shouted at him, "One where I could remember this 
life!" and that's when I told him I'd had enough . He 
wanted to talk to me about God again, but I went up 
to him and made one last attempt to explain to him that 
I had only a little time left and I didn't want to waste 
it on God. He tried to change the subject by asking 
me why I was calling him "monsieur" and not "father." 
That got me mad, and I told him he wasn't my father; 
he wasn't even on my side. 
"Yes, my son," he said, putting his hand on my 
shoulder, "I am on your side. But you have no way of 
knowing it, because your heart is blind. I shall pray for 
you." 
Then, I don't know why, but something inside me 
snapped. I started yelling at the top of my lungs, and I 
insulted him and told him not to waste his prayers on me. 
I grabbed him by the collar of his cassock. I was pour­
ing out on him everything that was in my heart, cries of 
anger and cries of joy. He seemed so certain about every­
thing, didn't he? And yet none of his certainties was 
worth one hair of a woman's head. He wasn't even sure 
he was alive, because he was living like a dead man. 
Whereas it looked as if I was the one who'd come 
up emptyhanded. But I was sure about me, about 
everything, surer than he could ever be, sure of my life 
and sure of the death I had waiting for me. Yes, that 
was all I had. But at least I had as much of a hold on 
120 0 THE STRANGER 0 
it as it had on me. I had been right, I was still right, I was 
always right. I had lived my life one way and I could 
just as well have lived it another. I had done this and I 
hadn't done that. I hadn't done this thing but I had done 
another. And so? It was as if I had waited all this time 
for this moment and for the first light of this dawn to 
be vindicated. Nothing, nothing mattered, and I knew 
why. So did he. Throughout the whole absurd life I'd 
lived, a dark wind had been rising toward me from 
somewhere deep in my future, across years that were 
still to come, and as it passed, this wind leveled whatever 
was offered to me at the time, in years no more real than 
the ones I was living. What did other people's deaths 
or a mother's love matter to me; what did his God or the 
lives people choose or the fate they think they elect 
matter to me when we're all elected by the same fate, 
me and billions of privileged people like him who also 
called themselves my brothers? Couldn't he see, couldn't 
he see that? Everybody was privileged. There were only 
privileg ed people. The others would all be condemned 
one day. And he would be condemned, too. What would 
it matter if he were accused of murder and then executed 
because he didn't cry at his mother's funeral? Sala­
mano's dog was worth just as much as his wife. The 
little robot woman was just as guilty as the Parisian 
woman Masson married, or as Marie, who had wanted 
me to marry her. What did it matter that Raymond was 
as much my friend as Celeste, who was worth a lot more 
than him? What did it matter that Marie now offered 
121 0 THE STRA NGER 0 
her lips to a new Meursault? Couldn't he, couldn't this 
condemned man see ... And that from somewhere deep 
in my future ... All the shouting had me gasping for 
air. But they were already tearing the chaplain from my 
grip and the guards were threatening me. He calmed 
them, though, and looked at me for a moment without 
saying anything. His eyes were full of tears. Then he 
turned and disappeared. 
With him gone, I was able to calm down again. I 
was exhausted and threw myself on my bunk. I must 
have fallen asleep, because I woke up with the stars in 
my face. Sounds of the countryside were drifting in. 
Smells of night, earth, and salt air were cooling my 
temples. The wondrous peace of that sleeping summer 
Rowed through me like a tide. Then, in the dark hour 
before dawn, sirens blasted. They were announcing 
departures for a world that now and forever meant noth­
ing to me. For the first time in a long time I thought 
about Maman. I felt as if I understood why at the end 
of her life she had taken a "fiance," why she had 
played at beginning again. Even there, in that home 
where lives were fading out, evening was a kind of wist­
ful respite. So close to death, Maman must have felt 
free then and ready to live it all again. Nobody, nobody 
had the right to cry over her. And I felt ready to live it 
all again too. As if that blind rage had washed me clean, 
rid me of hope; for the first time, in that night alive with 
signs and stars, I opened myself to the gentle indifference 
of the world. Finding it so much like myself-so like a 
122 0 THE STRAN GER 0 
brother, really-! felt that I had been happy and that I 
was happy again. For everything to be consummated, for 
me to feel less alone, I had only to wish that there be a 
large crowd of spectators the day of my execution and 
that they greet me with cries of hate. 
123 ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Albert Camus, son of a working-class family, was born 
in Algeria in 1913. He spent the early years of his life 
in North Africa, where he worked at various jobs-in 
the weather bureau, in an automobile-accessory firm, in 
a shipping company-to help pay for his courses at the 
University of Algiers. He then turned to journalism as 
a career. His report on the unhappy state of the 
Muslims of the Kabylie region aroused the Algerian 
government to action and brought him public notice. 
From 193 5 to 1938 he ran the Theatre de l'Equipe, 
a theatrical company that produced plays by Malraux, 
Gide, Synge, Dostoevski, and others. During World 
War II he was one of the leading writers of the French 
Resistance and editor of Combat, then an important 
underground newspaper. Camus was always very ac· 
tive in the theater, and several of his plays have 
been published and produced. His fiction, including 
The Stranger, The Plague, The Fall, and Exile and 
the Kingdom; his philosophical essays, The Myth of 
Sisyphus and The Rebel; and his plays have assured 
his preeminent position in modern French letters. In 
1957 Camus was awarded the Nobel Prize for Litera­
ture. His sudden death on January 4, 196o, cut short 
the career of one of the most important literary figures 
of the Western world when he was at the very summit 
of his powers. ABOUT THE TRAN SLATOR 
Matthew Ward is a poet, critic, and translator. His 
translations include works by Colette, Barthes, Picasso, 
Sartre, and others. He was educated at Stanford, Uni­
versity College in Dublin (where he was a Fulbright 
Scholar), and Columbia. He taught for several years at 
the Fieldston School in Riverdale, New York. Matthew 
Ward was born in Colorado and now lives in Man­
hattan. 
Albert Camus 
THE PLAGUE 
 
TRANSLATED FROM THE FREN CH BY Stuart Gilbert 
  First published in 1948      It is as reasonable to represent one ki nd of imprisonment by another, as it is to 
represent anything that really exists by that which exists not.  DANIEL DEFOE          PART I  The unusual events described in this chronicle occurred in 19 4- at Oran. Everyone agreed 
that, considering their somewhat extraordinar y character, they were out of place there. 
For its ordinariness is what strikes one firs t about the town of Oran, which is merely a 
large French port on the Algerian coast, h eadquarters of the Prefect of a French 
Department.  The town itself, let us admit, is ugly. It has a smug, placid air and you need time 
to discover what it is that makes it different from so many business centers in other parts 
of the world. How to conjure up a picture, for instance, of a town without pigeons, 
without any trees or gardens, where you never hear the beat of wings or the rustle of leaves, a thoroughly negative place, in short?  The seasons are discriminated only in the sky. All that tells you of spring's 
coming is the feel of the air,  or the baskets of flowers brought in from the suburbs by 
peddlers; it's a spring cried in the market places. During the summer the sun bakes the 
houses bone-dry, sprinkles our walls with gr ayish dust, and you have no option but to 
survive those days of fire indoors, behind closed shutters. In autumn, on the other hand, we have deluges of mud. Only wint er brings really pleasant weather. 
 Perhaps the easiest way of making a town 's acquaintance is to ascertain how the 
people in it work, how they love, and how th ey die. In our little town (is this, one 
wonders, an effect of the climate? All thr ee are done on much the same lines, with the 
same feverish yet casual air. The truth is th at everyone is bored, and devotes himself to cultivating habits. Our citizens work hard, but solely with the object of getting rich. Their 
chief interest is in commerce, and their ch ief aim in life is, as they call it, "doing 
business." Naturally they don't eschew such simpler pleasures as love-making, 
seabathing, going to the pictures . But, very sensibly, they reserve these pastimes for 
Saturday afternoons and Sundays and employ the rest of the week in making money, as 
much as possible. In the evening, on leaving th e office, they forgather, at an hour that 
never varies, in the cafes, stroll the same boulevard, or take the ai r on their balconies. The 
passions of the young are violent and short-lived; the vices of older men seldom range 
beyond an addiction to bowling, to banquets a nd "socials," or clubs where large sums 
change hands on the fall of a card.  It will be said, no doubt, that these habits  are not peculiar to our town; really all 
our contemporaries are much the same. Cert ainly nothing is commoner nowadays than to 
see people working from morn till night and then proceeding to fritter away at card-
tables, in cafes and in small-talk what time is  left for living. Nevert heless there still exist 
towns and countries where people have now a nd then an inkling of something different. 
In general it doesn't change their lives. Stil l, they have had an intimation, and that's so 
much to the good. Oran, however, seems to be  a town without intimations; in other 
words, completely modern. Hence I see no n eed to dwell on the ma nner of loving in our 
town. The men and women consume one another rapidly in what is called "the act of 
love," or else settle down to a mild habit of conjugality. We seldom find a mean between 
these extremes. That, too, is not exceptional. At Oran, as elsewhere, for lack of time and 
thinking, people have to love one an other without knowing much about it. 
 What is more exceptional in our town is the difficulty one may experience there in 
dying. "Difficulty," perhaps, is not the right word, 'discomfor t" would come nearer. Being 
ill's never agreeable but there are towns that stand by you, so to speak, when you are sick; in which you can, after a fashion, let yourself go. 
 An invalid needs small atten tions, he likes to have something to rely on, and that's 
natural enough. But at Oran the violent extr emes of temperature, the exigencies of 
business, the uninspiring surroundings, the sudde n nightfalls, and the very nature of its 
pleasures call for good health. An invalid feels out of it there. 
 Think what it must be for a dying man, trapped behind hundreds of walls all 
sizzling with heat, while the whole populat ion, sitting in cafes or hanging on the 
telephone, is discussing shipments, bills of lading, discounts! It will then be obvious what discomfort attends death, even modern d eath, when it waylays you under such conditions 
in a dry place.  These somewhat haphazard observations may give a fair idea of what our town is like. However, we must not exaggerate. R eally, all that was to be conveyed was the 
banality of the town's appearance and of lif e in it. But you can get through the days there 
without trouble, once you have formed habits . And since habits are precisely what our 
town encourages, all is for the best. Viewed fr om this angle, its life is not particularly 
exciting; that must be admitted. But, at least, social unrest is quite unknown among us. 
And our frank-spoken, amiable, and industr ious citizens have always inspired a 
reasonable esteem in visitors.  Treeless, glamourless, sou lless, the town of Oran ends by seeming restful and, 
after a while, you go complacently to sleep there.  It is only fair to add that Oran is grafted on to a unique  landscape, in the center of 
a bare plateau, ringed with luminous hills a nd above a perfectly shaped bay. All we may 
regret is the town's being so disposed that it turns its back on the bay, with the result that 
it's impossible to see the sea, you always have to go to look for it. 
 Such being the normal life of Oran, it will be easily understood that our fellow citizens had not the faintest reason to apprehe nd the incidents that t ook place in the spring 
of the year in question and were (as we subs equently realized) prem onitory signs of the 
grave events we are to chronicle. To some, thes e events will seem quite natural; to others, 
all but incredible. But, obvious ly, a narrator cannot take acc ount of these differences of 
outlook. His business is only to say: "This is what happene d," when he knows that it 
actually did happen, that it closely affected th e life of a whole populace,  and that there are 
thousands of eyewitnesses who can appraise in their hearts the truth of what he writes. 
 In any case the narrator (whose identity will be made known in due course) would 
have little claim to competence for a task li ke this, had not chance put him in the way of 
gathering much information, and had he not be en, by the force of things, closely involved 
in all that he proposes to na rrate. This is his ju stification for playing the part of a 
historian. Naturally, a historian, even an amateu r, always has data, personal or at second 
hand, to guide him. The present narrator has three kinds of data: first, what he saw 
himself; secondly, the accounts of other eyewitn esses (thanks to the part he played, he 
was enabled to learn their personal impressions from all those figuring in this chronicle); and, lastly, documents that subsequently came into his hands. He proposes to draw on these records whenever this seems desirable, and to employ them as he thinks best. He 
also proposes...  But perhaps the time has come to drop preliminaries and cautionary remarks and to launch into the narrative proper. The account  of the first days needs giving in some 
detail. 
 When leaving his surgery on the morning of April 16, Dr. Bernard Rieux felt 
something soft under his foot. It was a dead rat lying in the middle of the landing.  On the spur of the moment he kicked it to one side and, without giving it a further 
thought, continued on his way downstairs. Only when he was stepping out into the street 
did it occur to him that a dead rat had no business to be on his landing, and he turned 
back to ask the concierge of the building to see to its removal. It was not until he noticed old M. Michel's reaction to the news that he realized the peculiar na ture of his discovery. 
Personally, he had thought the presence of the dead rat rather odd, no more than that; the 
concierge, however, was genuinely outraged. On one point he was categorical: "There weren't no rats here." In vain the doctor a ssured him that there was a rat, presumably 
dead, on the second-floor landing; M. Michel's  conviction wasn't to be shaken. There 
"weren't no rats in the building," he repeat ed, so someone must have brought this one 
from outside. Some youngster tr ying to be funny, most likely. 
 That evening, when Dr. Rieux was standi ng in the entrance, feeling for the latch-
key in his pocket before starting up the stairs  to his apartment, he saw a big rat coming 
toward him from the dark end of the passa ge. It moved uncertain ly, and its fur was 
sopping wet. The animal stopped and seemed to be trying to get its balance, moved 
forward again toward the doctor, halted ag ain, then spun round on itself with a little 
squeal and fell on its side. Its mouth was slightly open and blood was spurting from it. After gazing at it for a mome nt, the doctor went upstairs.  He wasn't thinking about the rat. That glimpse of spurting blood had switched his 
thoughts back to something that had been on his mind all day. His wife, who had been ill 
for a year now, was due to leave next day for a sanatorium in the mountains. He found 
her lying down in the bedroom, resting, as he had asked her to do, in view of the 
exhausting journey before her. She gave him a smile.  "Do you know, I'm feeling ever so much better!" she said.  The doctor gazed down at the face that tu rned toward him in the glow of the 
bedside lamp. His wife was thirty, and the l ong illness had left its mark on her face. Yet 
the thought that came to Rieux's mind as he gazed at her was: "How young she looks, 
almost like a little girl!" But perhaps that was because of the smile, which effaced all 
else.  "Now try to sleep," he counseled. "The  nurse is coming at eleven, you know, and 
you have to catch the midday train."  He kissed the slightly moist forehead. The smile escorted him to the door.  Next day, April 17, at eight o'clock th e concierge buttonholed the doctor as he 
was going out. Some young scallywags, he said, had dumped three dead rats in the hall. 
They'd obviously been caught in traps with ve ry strong springs, as they were bleeding 
profusely. The concierge had lingered in the doorway for quite a wh ile, holding the rats 
by their legs and keeping a sharp eye on the passers-by, on the off chance that the miscreants would give themselves away by grinning or by some facetious remark. His 
watch had been in vain.  "But I'll nab 'em all right,"  said M. Michel hopefully. 
 Much puzzled, Rieux decided to begin his round in the outs kirts of the town, 
where his poorer patients lived. The scavengi ng in these districts was done late in the 
morning and, as he drove his car along the st raight, dusty streets, he cast glances at the 
garbage cans aligned along the edge of th e sidewalk. In one street alone the doctor 
counted as many as a dozen rats deposited on the vegetable and other refuse in the cans.  He found his first patient, an asthma case of long standing, in bed, in a room that 
served as both dining-room and bedroom a nd overlooked the street. The invalid was an 
old Spaniard with a hard, rugged face. Placed on the coverlet in front of him were two 
pots containing dried peas. When the doctor entered, the old man was sitting up, bending 
his neck back, gasping and wheezing in his e fforts to recover his br eath. His wife brought 
a bowl of water.  "Well, doctor," he said, while the inj ection was being made, "they're coming out, 
have you noticed?"  "The rats, he means," his wife explained. "The man next door found three."  "They're coming out, you can see them in all the trash cans. It's hunger!"  Rieux soon discovered that th e rats were the great topi c of conversation in that 
part of the town. After his r ound of visits he drove home. 
 "There's a telegram for you, sir, ups tairs," M. Michel informed him. 
 The doctor asked him if he'd seen any more rats.  "No," the concierge replied, "there ai n't been any more. I'm keeping a sharp 
lookout, you know. Those youngsters w ouldn't dare when I'm around." 
 The telegram informed Rieux that his mo ther would be arriving next day. She was 
going to keep house for her son during his wife's absence. When the doctor entered his apartment he found the nurse alread y there. He looked at his wife.  She was in a tailor-made suit, and he no ticed that she had used rouge. He smiled 
to her. 
 "That's splendid," he said. "You're looking very nice."  A few minutes later he was seeing her into the sleeping-car. She glanced round 
the compartment.  "It's too expensive for us really, isn't it?"  "It had to be done," Rieux replied.  "What's this story about rats that's going round?"  "I can't explain it. It certa inly is queer, but it'll pass." 
 Then hurriedly he begged her to forgive him; he felt he should have looked after 
her better, he'd been most remiss. When she shook her head, as if to make him stop, he added: "Anyhow, once you're back everything wi ll be better. We'll make a fresh start." 
 "That's it!" Her eyes were spark ling. "Let's make a fresh start." 
 But then she turned her head and seemed to be gazing throug h the car window at 
the people on the platform, jostling one another in their haste. The hissing of the locomotive reached their ears. Gently he cal led his wife's first name; when she looked 
round he saw her face wet with tears.  "Don't," he murmured.  Behind the tears the smile returned, a little tense. She dr ew a deep breath. 
 "Now off you go! Everyt hing will be all right." 
 He took her in his arms, then stepped back on the platform. Now he could only 
see her smile through the window.  "Please, dear," he said, "take great care of yourself." 
 But she could not hear him.  As he was leaving the platform, near  the exit he met M. Othon, the police 
magistrate, holding his small boy by the ha nd. The doctor asked him if he was going 
away.  Tall and dark, M. Othon had something of th e air of what used to be called a man 
of the world, and something of an undertaker's assistant.  "No," the magistrate replied, "I've come  to meet Madame Othon, who's been to 
present her respects to my family."  The engine whistled.  "These rats, now?" the magistrate began.  Rieux made a brief movement in the di rection of the train, then turned back 
toward the exit.  "The rats?" he said. "It's nothing."  The only impression of that moment wh ich, afterwards, he could recall was the 
passing of a railroadman with a box full of dead rats under his arm.  Early in the afternoon of that day, when  his consultations were beginning, a 
young man called on Rieux. The doctor gathered that he had called before, in the morning, and was a journalist by profe ssion. His name was Raymond Rambert. 
 Short, square-shouldered, with a determ ined-looking face and keen, intelligent 
eyes, he gave the impression of someone who could keep his end up in any circumstances. He wore a sports type of clothes. He came st raight to the point.  His newspaper, one of the leading Paris dailies, had commissioned him to make a 
report on the living-conditions prevailing am ong the Arab population, and especially on 
the sanitary conditions.  Rieux replied that these c onditions were not good. But, before he said any more, 
he wanted to know if the journalist would be allowed to tell the truth. 
 "Certainly," Rambert replied.  "I mean," Rieux explained, "would you be allowed to publish an unqualified 
condemnation of the present state of things?"  "Unqualified? Well, no, I couldn't go that far.  But surely things aren't quite so bad 
as that?"  "No," Rieux said quietly, they weren't so bad as that. He had put the question 
solely to find out if Rambert could or coul dn't state the facts wit hout paltering with the 
truth. "I've no use for statements in which so mething is kept back," he added. "That is 
why I shall not furnish information in support of yours."  The journalist smiled. "You talk the language of Saint-Just."  Without raising his voice Rieux said he  knew nothing about that. The language he 
used was that of a man who was sick and ti red of the world he lived in, though he had 
much liking for his fellow men and had resolv ed, for his part, to have no truck with 
injustice and compromises with the truth.  His shoulders hunched, Rambert gazed at  the doctor for some moments without 
speaking. Then, "I think I understand you," he said, getting up from his chair. 
 The doctor accompanied him to the door.  "It's good of you to take it like that," he said. 
 "Yes, yes, I understand," Rambert repeated, with what seemed a hint of impatience in his voice. "So rry to have troubled you." 
 When shaking hands with him, Rieux s uggested that if he was out for curious 
stories for his paper, he might say something about the extraordinary number of dead rats 
that were being found in the town just now.  "Ah!" Rambert exclaimed. "Tha t certainly interests me." 
 On his way out at five for another round of visits, the doctor passed on the stairway a stocky, youngish man, with a big, deeply furrowed face and bushy eyebrows. 
He had met him once or twice in the top-fl oor apartment, which was occupied by some 
male Spanish dancers. Puffing a cigarette, Jean Tarrou was gazing down at the convulsions of a rat dying on the step in front  of him. He looked up, and his gray eyes 
remained fixed on the doctor for some moments; then, after wishing him good day, he remarked that it was rather odd, the way all th ese rats were coming out of their holes to 
die.  "Very odd," Rieux agreed, "and it en ds by getting on one's nerves." 
 "In a way, doctor, only in a way. We've not seen anything of the sort before, that's 
all. Personally I find it interesti ng, yes, definitely interesting." 
 Tarrou ran his fingers through his hair to brush it off his foreh ead, looked again at 
the rat, which had now stopped moving, then smiled toward Rieux.  "But really, doctor, it's the c oncierge's headache, isn't it?" 
 As it so happened, the concierge was th e next person Rieux encountered. He was 
leaning against the wall beside  the street door; he was l ooking tired and his normally 
rubicund face had lost its color.  "Yes, I know," the old man told Rieux, who had informed him of the latest 
casualty among the rats. "I keep finding 'em by twos and threes. But it's the same thing in 
the other houses in the street." 
 He seemed depressed and worried, and was scratching his neck absentmindedly. 
 Rieux asked him how he felt. The concie rge wouldn't go so far as to say he was 
feeling ill. Still he wasn't quite up to the ma rk. In his opinion it was just due to worry; 
these damned rats had given him "a shock, like. " It would be a relief when they stopped 
coming out and dying all over the place.  Next morning, it was April 18, when the doctor was bringing back his mother from the station, he found M. Michel looking s till more out of sorts. The stairway from 
the cellar to the attics was strewn with  dead rats, ten or a dozen of them. 
 The garbage cans of all the houses in the street were full of rats. 
 The doctor's mother took it quite calmly.  "It's like that sometimes," she said va guely. She was a small woman with silver 
hair and dark, gentle eyes. "I'm so glad to  be with you again, Bernard," she added. "The 
rats can't change that, anyhow."  He nodded. It was a fact that everyt hing seemed easy when she was there. 
 However, he rang up the Municipal Offi ce. He knew the man in charge of the 
department concerned with the extermination of vermin and he asked him if he'd heard 
about all the rats that were coming out to di e in the open. Yes, Mercier knew all about it; 
in fact, fifty rats had been found in his offices , which were near the wharves. To tell the 
truth, he was rather perturbed; did the doctor think it meant a nything serious? Rieux 
couldn't give a definite opini on, but he thought the sanitary service should take action of 
some kind.  Mercier agreed. "And, if you think it's r eally worth the trouble , I'll get an order 
issued as well." 
 "It certainly is worth th e trouble," Rieux replied. 
 His charwoman had just told him that  several hundred dead rats had been 
collected in the big factory where her husband worked. 
 It was about this time that our townsf olk began to show signs of uneasiness. 
 For, from April 18 onwards, quantities of dead or dying rats were found in 
factories and warehouses. In some cases the an imals were killed to put an end to their 
agony. From the outer suburbs to the center of the town, in all the byways where the 
doctor's duties took him, in every thoroughfare,  rats were piled up in garbage cans or 
lying in long lines in the gutters. The evening papers that day took up the matter and 
inquired whether or not the city fathers were  going to take steps, and what emergency 
measures were contemplated, to abate this pa rticularly disgusting nuisance. Actually the 
municipality had not contemplated doing a nything at all, but now a meeting was 
convened to discuss the situation.  An order was transmitted to the sanitary  service to collect the dead rats at 
daybreak every morning. When the rats had been  collected, two municipal trucks were to 
take them to be burned in the town incinerator.  But the situation worsened in the following days. There were more and more dead vermin in the streets, and the collecto rs had bigger truckloads every morning. 
 On the fourth day the rats began to come out and die in batches. From basements, cellars, and sewers they emerged in long wave ring files into the light of day, swayed helplessly, then did a sort of pirouette and fell dead at the feet of the horrified onlookers. 
At night, in passages and alleys , their shrill little death-cries could be clearly heard. In the 
mornings the bodies were found lining the gut ters, each with a gout of blood, like a red 
flower, on its tapering muzzle; some were bl oated and already begi nning to rot, others 
rigid, with their whiskers still erect. Even  in the busy heart of the town you found them 
piled in little heaps on landings and in backyards. Some stole forth to die singly in the 
halls of public offices, in school playgrounds , and even on cafe te rraces. Our townsfolk 
were amazed to find such busy centers as the Place d'Armes, the boulevards, the 
promenade along the waterfront, dotted with repulsive little corpse s. After the daily 
clean-up of the town, which took place at sunris e, there was a brief respite; then gradually 
the rats began to appear again in numbers that went on increas ing throughout the day. 
People out at night would often feel underf oot the squelchy roundness of a still warm 
body. It was as if the earth on which our houses  stood were being purged of its secreted 
humors; thrusting up to the surface the abscesse s and pus-clots that had been forming in 
its entrails. You must pi cture the consternation of our little town, hith erto so tranquil, and 
now, out of the blue, shaken to its core, like  a quite healthy man who all of a sudden feels 
his temperature shoot up and the blood seething like wildfire in his veins.  Things went so far that the Ransdoc Info rmation Bureau (inqui ries on all subjects 
promptly and accurately answered), which ran a free-information talk on the radio, by 
way of publicity, began its talk by announcing that no less than 6,231 rats had been collected and burned in a singl e day, April 25. Giving as it did an ampler and more 
precise view of the scene daily enacted before our eyes, this amazing figure administered a jolt to the public nerves. Hitherto people had merely grumbled at a stupid, rather 
obnoxious visitation; they now r ealized that this strange phenomenon, whose scope could 
not be measured and whose origins escaped detection, had something vaguely menacing about it. Only the old Spaniard whom Dr. Ri eux was treating for asthma went on rubbing 
his hands and chuckling: "They're coming out, they're coming out," with senile glee.  On April 28, when the Ransdoc Bureau announced that 8,ooo rats had been collected, a wave of somethi ng like panic swept the town. 
 There was a demand for drastic measur es, the authorities were accused of 
slackness, and people who had houses on the co ast spoke of moving there, early in the 
year though it was. But next day the bureau informed them that the phenomenon had 
abruptly ended and the sanitary service ha d collected only a trifling number of rats. 
Everyone breathed more freely.  It was, however, on this same day, at noon, that Dr. Rieux, when parking his car 
in front of the apartment house where he liv ed, noticed the concierge coming toward him 
from the end of the street. He was dragging himself along, his head bent, arms and legs 
curiously splayed out, with th e jerky movements of a cloc kwork doll. The old man was 
leaning on the arm of a priest whom the doc tor knew. It was Father Paneloux, a learned 
and militant Jesuit, whom he had met occasiona lly and who was very highly thought of in 
our town, even in circles qu ite indifferent to religion. Ri eux waited for the two men to 
draw up to him.  M. Michel's eyes were fever-bright a nd he was breathing wheezily. The old man 
explained that, feeling "a bit off color," he had gone out to take the air. But he had started 
feeling pains in all sorts of places, in his neck, armpits, and groin, and had been obliged 
to turn back and ask Father Paneloux to give him an arm.  "It's just swellings," he said. "I must have strained myself somehow." 
 Leaning out of the window of the car, the doctor ran his hand over the base of 
Michel's neck; a hard lump, like a knot in wood, had formed there. 
 "Go to bed at once, and take your te mperature. I'll come to see you this 
afternoon." 
 When the old man had gone, Rieux asked Fa ther Paneloux what he made of this 
queer business about the rats.  "Oh, I suppose it's an epidemic they've been having." The Father's eyes were 
smiling behind his big round glasses.  After lunch, while Rieux was reading for the second time the telegram his wife had sent him from the sanatorium, announcing her arrival, the phone rang. It was one of 
his former patients, a clerk in the Municipa l Office, ringing him up. He had suffered for a 
long time from a constriction of the aorta, a nd, as he was poor, Rieux had charged no fee. 
 "Thanks, doctor, for remembering me. Bu t this time it's somebody else. The man 
next door has had an accident. Please co me at once." He sounded out of breath. 
 Rieux thought quickly; yes, he could s ee the concierge afterwards. A few minutes 
later he was entering a small house in the ru e Faidherbe, on the outskirts of the town. 
Halfway up the drafty, foul-smelling stairs , he saw Joseph Grand, the clerk, hurrying 
down to meet him. He was a man of about fi fty years of age, tall and drooping, with 
narrow shoulders, thin limbs, and a yellowish mustache.  "He looks better now," he told Rieux, "but I really thought his number was up."  He blew his nose vigorously.  On the top floor, the third, Rieux noticed  something scrawled in red chalk on a 
door on the left: Come in, I've hanged myself.  They entered the room. A rope dangled from a hanging lamp above a chair lying on its side. The dining-room table had been  pushed into a corner. But the rope hung 
empty.  "I got him down just in time." Grand s eemed always to have trouble in finding his 
words, though he expressed himself in the simplest possible way. "I was going out and I 
heard a noise. When I saw that  writing on the door, I thought it was a a prank. Only, then 
I heard a funny sort of groan; it made my bl ood run cold, as they say." He scratched his 
head. "That must be a painful way of of doi ng it, I should think. Naturally I went in." 
 Grand had opened a door and they were st anding on the threshold of a bright but 
scantily furnished bedroom. There was a bras s bedstead against one of the walls, and a 
plump little man was lying there, breathing heavily. He gazed at them with bloodshot eyes. Rieux stopped short. In the intervals of  the man's breathing he seemed to hear the 
little squeals of rats. But he  couldn't see anything moving in  the corners of the room. 
Then he went to the bedside. Evidently the ma n had not fallen from a sufficient height, or 
very suddenly, for the collar-bone had held.  Naturally there was some asphyxia. An X-ray photograph would be needed. 
 Meanwhile the doctor gave him a camphor injection and assured him he would be 
all right in a few days.  "Thanks, doctor," the man mumbled.  When Rieux asked Grand if he had notified the police, he hung his head. 
 "Well, as a matter of fact, I haven' t. The first thing, I thought, was to?" 
 "Quite so," Rieux cut in. "I'll see to it."  But the invalid made a fretful gesture a nd sat up in bed. He felt much better, he 
explained; really it wasn't worth the trouble. 
 "Don't feel alarmed," Rieux said. "It's little more than a formality. Anyhow, I have to report this to the police."  "Oh!" The man slumped back on th e bed and started sobbing weakly. 
 Grand, who had been twiddling his must ache while they were speaking, went up 
to the bed.  "Come, Monsieur Cottard," he said. "Try to understand. People could say the 
doctor was to blame, if you took it into your  head to have another shot at it." 
 Cottard assured him tearfully that there wasn't the least risk of that; he'd had a sort of crazy fit, but it had passed and all he wanted now was to be left in peace. Rieux was 
writing a prescription.  "Very well," he said. "We'll say no more about it for the present. I'll come and see you again in a day or two. But don't do anything silly."  On the landing he told Grand that he wa s obliged to make a report, but would ask 
the police inspector to hold up th e inquiry for a couple of days. 
 "But somebody should watch Cottard tonigh t," he added. "Has he any relations?" 
 "Not that I know of. But I can very well stay with hi m. I can't say I really know 
him, but one's got to help a neighbor, hasn't one?"  As he walked down the stairs Rieux caught himself glancing into the darker 
corners, and he asked Grand if the rats had quite disappeared in his part of the town. 
 Grand had no idea. True, he'd heard some talk about rats, but he never paid much attention to gossip like that. "I've ot her things to think about," he added. 
 Rieux, who was in a hurry to get away, was already shaking his hand. There was a 
letter to write to his wife, and he wanted to see the concierge first. 
 News-venders were shouting the latest news that the rats had disappeared. But 
Rieux found his patient leaning over the edge of the bed, one hand pressed to his belly 
and the other to his neck, vomiting pinkish bile into a slop-pail. 
 After retching for some moments, the man lay back again, gasping. His temperature was 103, the ganglia of his neck  and limbs were swollen, and two black 
patches were developing on his thighs. He now complained of internal pains.  "It's like fire," he whimpered. "The bastard's burning me inside."  He could hardly get the words through hi s fever-crusted lips a nd he gazed at the 
doctor with bulging eyes that his headache ha d suffused with tears. His wife cast an 
anxious look at Rieux, who said nothing.  "Please, doctor," sh e said, "what is it?" 
 "It might be almost anything. There's nothi ng definite as yet. Keep him on a light 
diet and give him plenty to drink."  The sick man had been complaining of a raging thirst.  On returning to his apartment Rieux rang up his colleague Richard, one of the 
leading practitioners in the town.  "No," Richard said, "I can't say I've noticed anything exceptional." 
 "No cases of fever with local inflammation?"  "Wait a bit! I have two cases with inflamed ganglia."  "Abnormally so?"  "Well," Richard said, "that depe nds on what you mean by 'normal.'"  Anyhow, that night the por ter was running a temperature of 104 and in delirium, 
always babbling about "them rats." Rieux trie d a fixation abscess. When he felt the sting 
of the turpentine, the old man yelled: "The bastards!" 
 The ganglia had become still larger a nd felt like lumps of solid fibrous matter 
embedded in the flesh. Mme Michel had completely broken down.  "Sit up with him," the doctor sa id, "and call me if necessary." 
 Next day, April 30, the sky was blue a nd slightly misty. A warm, gentle breeze 
was blowing, bringing with it a smell of fl owers from the outlying suburbs. The morning 
noises of the streets sounded louder, gayer than usual. For everyone in our little town this 
day brought the promise of a new lease of life,  now that the shadow  of fear under which 
they had been living for a week had lifted.  Rieux, too, was in an optimistic mood when he went down to see the concierge; he had been cheered up by a letter from hi s wife that had come with the first mail. 
 Old M. Michel's temperature had gone  down to 99 and, though he still looked 
very weak, he was smiling. "He's better, doctor,  isn't he?" his wife inquired. "Well, it's a 
bit too early to say."  At noon the sick man's temperature shot up abruptly to 104, he was in constant 
delirium and had started vomiting again. The ganglia in the neck were painful to the 
touch, and the old man seemed to be straining to hold his head as far as possible from his 
body. His wife sat at the foot of the bed, her hands on the counterpane, gently clasping 
his feet. She gazed at Rieux imploringly.  "Listen," he said, "we'll have to mo ve him to a hospital and try a special 
treatment. I'll ring up for the ambulance."  Two hours later the doctor and Mme Michel were in the ambulance bending over the sick man. Rambling words were issuing from the gaping mouth, thickly coated now 
with sores. He kept on repeating: "Them ra ts! Them damned rats!" His face had gone 
livid, a grayish green, his lips were bloodless,  his breath came in sudden gasps. His limbs 
spread out by the ganglia, embedded in the berth as if he were trying to bury himself in it 
or a voice from the depths of the earth  were summoning him below, the unhappy man 
seemed to be stifling under some un seen pressure. His wife was sobbing. 
 "Isn't there any hope left, doctor?"  "He's dead," said Rieux.   Michel's death marked, one might say, the end of the first period, that of bewildering 
portents, and the beginning of another, relative ly more trying, in wh ich the perplexity of 
the early days gradually gave place to panic.  Reviewing that first phase in the light of 
subsequent events, our townsfol k realized that they had never dreamed it possible that our 
little town should be chosen out for the scene of such grotesque happenings as the 
wholesale death of rats in broad daylight or the decease of concierges through exotic maladies. In this respect they were wrong, and their views obviously called for revision. Still, if things had gone thus far and no farther, force of habit would doubtless have gained the day, as usual. But other members of our community, not all menials or poor 
people, were to follow the path down which M. Michel had led the way. And it was then 
that fear, and with fear serious reflection, began.  However, before entering on a detailed account of the next phase, the narrator 
proposes to give the opinion of another witness on the period that has been described. Jean Tarrou, whose acquaintance we have alr eady made at the beginning of this narrative, 
had come to Oran some weeks before and was staying in a big hotel in the center of the 
town. Apparently he had private means and was not engaged in business. But though he 
gradually became a familiar figure in our midst, no one knew where he hailed from or 
what had brought him to Oran. He was often to be seen in public and at the beginning of spring was seen on one or other of the beach es almost every day;  obviously he was fond 
of swimming. Good-humored, always ready with  a smile, he seemed an addict of all 
normal pleasures without being th eir slave. In fact, the only  habit he was known to have 
was that of cultivating the society of the Spanish dancers and musicians who abound in 
our town.  His notebooks comprise a sort of chronicle of those strange early days we all lived through. But an unusual type of chronicle, si nce the writer seems to  make a point of 
understatement, and at first sight we might almost imagine that Tarrou had a habit of 
observing events and people through the wrong end of a telescope. In those chaotic times he set himself to recording the history of what the normal historian passes over. 
Obviously we may deplore this curious kink in his character and suspect in him a lack of 
proper feeling. All the same, it is undeniable that these notebooks, which form a sort of 
discursive diary, supply the chr onicler of the period with a ho st of seeming-trivial details 
which yet have their importance, and whose very oddity should be enough to prevent the 
reader from passing hasty judgment on this singular man.  The earliest entries made by Jean Tarr ou synchronize with his coming to Oran. 
 From the outset they reveal a paradoxical satisfaction at the discovery of a town so intrinsically ugly. We find in them a minute description of the two bronze lions 
adorning the Municipal Office, and appropriate comments on the lack of trees, the 
hideousness of the houses, and the absurd lay-out of the town.  Tarrou sprinkles his descriptions with bits of conversation ove rheard in streetcars 
and in the streets, never adding a comment on them except,  this comes somewhat later' 
in the report of a dialogue concerning a ma n named Camps. It was a chat between two 
streetcar conductors.  "You knew Camps, didn't you?" asked one of them. "Camps? A tall chap with a 
black mustache?"  "That's him. A switchman." "Ah yes, I re member now." "Well, he's dead." "Oh? 
When did he die?" "After that business about  the rats." "You don't say so! What did he 
die of?" "I couldn't say exactly. Some kind of fever.  Of course, he never was what you might call fit. He got abscesses under the arms, 
and they did him in, it seems."  "Still, he didn't look that different from other people." "I wouldn't say that. He had 
a weak chest and he used to play the trombone in the town band. It's hard on the lungs, blowing a trombone."  "Ah, if you've got weak lungs, it don't do you any good, blowing down a big instrument like that."  After jotting down this dialogue Tarr ou went on to speculate why Camps had 
joined a band when it was so clearly inadvisa ble, and what obscure motive had led him to 
risk his life for the sake of parading the streets on Sunday mornings.  We gather that Tarrou was agreeably impressed by a little scene that took place daily on the balcony of a house facing his windo w. His room at the hotel looked on to a small side street and there were always seve ral cats sleeping in the shadow of the walls. 
Every day, soon after lunch, at a time when mo st people stayed indoors, enjoying a siesta, 
a dapper little old man stepped out on the balcon y on the other side of the street. He had a 
soldierly bearing, very erect, and affected a military style of dressing; his snow-white hair 
was always brushed to perfect smoothness.  Leaning over the balcony he would call: 
"Pussy! 
 Pussy!" in a voice at once haughty and endearing. The cats blinked up at him with sleep-pale eyes, but made no move as yet. He then proceeded to tear some paper into scraps and let them fall into the street; in terested by the fluttering shower of white 
butterflies, the cats came forward, lifting tentativ e paws toward the last scraps of paper. 
Then, taking careful aim, the old man would spit vigorously at the cats and, whenever a 
liquid missile hit the quarry, would beam with delight. 
 Lastly, Tarrou seemed to have been quite fascinated by the commercial character of the town, whose aspect, activities, and ev en pleasures all seemed to be dictated by 
considerations of business. This idiosyncrasy, the term he uses in his diary?was warmly 
approved of by Tarrou; indeed, one of hi s appreciative comments ends on the 
exclamation: "At last!"  These are the only passages in which our vi sitor's record, at this period, strikes a 
seemingly personal note. Its significance a nd the earnestness behind it might escape the 
reader on a casual perusal. For example, afte r describing how the discovery of a dead rat 
led the hotel cashier to make an error in hi s bill, Tarrou added: "Q uery: How contrive not 
to waste one's time? Answer: By being fully aware of it all the while. Ways in which this can be done: By spending one's days on an uneasy chair in a dentist's waiting-room; by remaining on one's balcony all a Sunday afternoon; by listening to lect ures in a language 
one doesn't know; by traveling by the longest an d least-convenient tr ain routes, and of 
course standing all the way; by lining up at the box-office of theaters and then not buying 
a seat; and so forth."  Then, immediately following these eccentr icities of thought and expression, we 
come on a detailed description of the streetca r service in the town, the structure of the 
cars, their indetermin ate color, their unvarying dir tiness, and he concludes his 
observations with a "Very odd," which explains -nothing.  So much by way of introduction to Tarr ou's comments on the phenomenon of the 
rats.  "The little old fellow opposite is quite disconsolate today. There are no more cats. 
The sight of all those dead rats strewn a bout the street may have excited their hunting 
instinct; anyhow, they all have vanished. To my thinking, there's no question of their 
eating the dead rats. Mine, I remember, turned up their noses at dead things. All the same, 
they're probably busy hunting in the cellars, he nce the old boy's plight. His hair isn't as 
well brushed as usual, and he looks less aler t, less military. You can see he is worried. 
After a few moments he went back into the room. But first he spat once on emptiness. 
 "In town today a streetcar was stopped b ecause a dead rat had been found in it. 
 (Query: How did it get there?) Two or three women promptly alighted. The rat 
was thrown out. The car went on.  "The night watchman at the hotel, a leve l-headed man, assured me that all these 
rats meant trouble coming. 'When the rat leave a ship...' I replied that this held good for 
ships, but for towns it hadn't yet been demons trated. But he stuck to his point. I asked what sort of 'trouble' we might expect. That he couldn't say; disasters always come out of 
the blue. But he wouldn't be surprised if there were an earthquake brewing. I admitted that was possible, and then he aske d if the prospect didn't alarm me. 
 " 'The only thing I'm interested in,' I told him, 'is acquiring peace of mind.' 
 "He understood me perfectly.  "I find a family that has its meals in this hotel quite interesting. The father is a tall, 
thin man, always dressed in black and wearing a starched collar. The top of his head is 
bald, with two tufts of gray hair on each si de. His small, beady eyes, narrow nose, and 
hard, straight mouth make him look like a well -brought-up owl. He is always first at the 
door of the restaurant, stands aside to let his wife, a tiny woman, like a black mouse, go 
in, and then comes in himself with a sma ll boy and girl, dressed like performing poodles, 
at his heels. When they are at the table he re mains standing till his wi fe is seated and only 
then the two poodles can perch themselves  on their chairs. He  uses no terms of 
endearment to his family, addresses politely sp iteful remarks to his wife, and bluntly tells 
the kids what he thinks of them.  " 'Nicole, you're behaving quite disgracefully.'  "The little girl is on the brink of tears, which is as it should be. 
 "This morning the small boy was all excite ment about the rats, and started saying 
something on the subject.  " 'Philippe, one doesn't talk of rats at ta ble. For the future I forbid you to use the 
word.'  " 'Your father's right,' approved the mouse.  "The two poodles buried their noses in  their plates, and the owl acknowledged 
thanks by a curt, perfunctory nod.  "This excellent example notwithstanding, everybody in town is talking about the rats, and the local newspaper has taken a hand. The town-topics column, usually very 
varied, is now devoted exclusively to a campa ign against the local authorities. 'Are our 
city fathers aware that the decaying bodies of these rodents constitute a grave danger to the population?' The manager of the hotel can ta lk of nothing else. But he has a personal 
grievance, too; that dead rats should be found in the elevator of a three-star hotel seems to 
him the end of all things. To console him, I said: 'But, you know, everybody's in the same boat.'  " 'That's just it,' he replied. 'Now we're like everybody else.' 
 "He was the first to tell me about the out break of this queer kind of fever which is 
causing much alarm. One of hi s chambermaids has got it. 
 " 'But I feel sure it's not contag ious,' he hastened to assure me. 
 "I told him it was all the same to me.  " 'Ah, I understand, sir. You're like me, you're a fatalist.'  "I had said nothing of the kind and, what 's more, am not a fatalist. I told him 
so...."  From this point onwards Tarrou's entrie s deal in some detail with the curious 
fever that was causing much anxiety among th e public. When noting th at the little old 
man, now that the rats had ceased appearing, had regained his cats and was studiously 
perfecting his shooting, Tarrou adds that a dozen or so cases of this fever were known to have occurred, and most had ended fatally.  For the light it may throw on the narrative that follows, Tarrou's description of Dr. 
Rieux may be suitably inserted here. So far as the narrator can judge, it is fairly accurate. 
 "Looks about thirty-five. Moderate height. Broad shoul ders. Almost rectangular 
face. Dark, steady eyes, but prominent jaws. A biggish, well-modeled nose. Black hair, cropped very close. A curving mouth with thick, usually tight-set lips.  With his tanned skin, the black down on his hands and arms, the dark but becoming suits he always wears, he reminds one of a Sicilian peasant.  "He walks quickly. When crossing a stre et, he steps off the sidewalk without 
changing his pace, but two out of  three times makes a little hop when he steps on to the 
sidewalk on the other side. He is absentminded and, when driving his ca r, often leaves his 
side-signals on after he has turned a corn er. Always bareheaded. Looks knowledgeable." 
 Tarrou's figures were correct. Dr. Rie ux was only too well aware of the serious 
turn things had taken. After seeing to the isolat ion of the concierge's body, he had rung 
up Richard and asked what he made  of these inguinal-fever cases. 
 "I can make nothing of them," Richard c onfessed. "There have been two deaths, 
one in forty-eight hours, the ot her in three days. And the second patient showed all the 
signs of convalescence when I visited him on the second day."  "Please let me know if you ha ve other cases," Rieux said. 
 He rang up some other colleagues. As a re sult of these inquiries  he gathered that 
there had been some twenty cases of th e same type within the last few days. 
 Almost all had ended fatally. He then advised Richard, who was chairman of the local Medical Association, to have any fresh cases put into  isolation wards. 
 "Sorry," Richard said, "but I can't do anything about it. An order to that effect can be issued only by the Prefect. Anyhow, what grounds have you for supposing there's danger of contagion?"  "No definite grounds. But the symptoms are definitely alarming." 
 Richard, however, repeated that "such measures were outside his province." The 
most he could do was to put the matter up to the Prefect. 
 But while these talks were going on, the weather changed for the worse. On the 
day following old Michel's death the sky clouded up and there were brief torrential 
downpours, each of which was followed by some hours of muggy heat. The aspect of the sea, too, changed; its dark-blue translucen cy had gone and, under the lowering sky, it had 
steely or silvery glin ts that hurt the eyes to look at. The damp heat of the spring made 
everyone long for the coming of the dry, clea n summer heat. On the town, humped snail-
wise on its plateau and shut off almost ever ywhere from the sea, a mood of listlessness 
descended. Hemmed in by lines and lines of  whitewashed walls, wa lking between rows 
of dusty shops, or riding in the dingy yellow streetcars, you felt, as it were, trapped by the climate. This, however, was not the case with  Rieux's old Spanish patient, who welcomed 
this weather with enthusiasm.  "It cooks you," he said. "J ust the thing for asthma." 
 Certainly it "cooked you," but exactly like a fever. I ndeed, "the whole town was 
running a temperature; such anyhow was the im pression Dr. Rieux coul d not shake off as 
he drove to the rue Faidherbe for the inquiry into Cottard's attempted suicide. That this impression was unreasonable he knew, and he at tributed it to nervous  exhaustion; he had 
certainly his full share of worries just at present.  In fact, it was high time to put the brakes  on and try to get his nerves into some 
sort of order. 
 On reaching his destination he found th at the police inspector hadn't turned up 
yet. Grand, who met him on the landing, suggested  they should wait in his place, leaving 
the door open. The municipal clerk had two r ooms, both very sparsely furnished. The 
only objects to catch the eye we re a bookshelf on which lay tw o or three dictionaries, and 
a small blackboard on which one could just r ead two half-obliterated words: "flowery 
avenues."  Grand announced that Cottard had had a good night. But he'd waked up this morning with pains in his head and feeling very low. Grand, too, looked tired and overwrought; he kept pacing up and down th e room, opening and closing a portfolio 
crammed with sheets of manus cript that lay on the table. 
 Meanwhile, however, he informed the doctor that he really knew very little about 
Cottard, but believed him to have private mean s in a small way. Cottard was a queer bird. 
For a long while their relations went no fart her than wishing each  other good-day when 
they met on the stairs.  "I've only had two conversations with him. Some days ago I upset a box of colored chalks I was bringing home, on the land ing. They were red and blue chalks. Just 
then Cottard came out of his room and he helped me pick them up. He asked me what I wanted colored chalks for."  Grand had then explained to him that he  was trying to brush up his Latin. He'd 
learned it at school, of course, but  his memories had grown blurred. 
 "You see, doctor, I've been told that  a knowledge of Latin gives one a better 
understanding of the real meanings of French words."  So he wrote Latin words on his blackboar d, then copied out ag ain in blue chalk 
the part of each word that changed in conjugation or declension, and in red chalk the part 
of the word that never varied. 
 "I'm not sure if Cottard followed this ve ry clearly, but he seemed interested and 
asked me for a red chalk. That rather surpri sed me, but after all? Of course I couldn't 
guess the use he'd put it to."  Rieux asked what was the subject of thei r second conversation. But just then the 
inspector came, accompanied by a clerk, and said  he wished to begin by hearing Grand's 
statement. The doctor noticed that Grand, wh en referring to Cottard, always called him 
"the unfortunate man," and at one moment used even the expression "his grim resolve." When discussing the possible motives for the at tempted suicide, Grand showed an almost 
finical anxiety over his choice of words. Fina lly he elected for the expression "a secret 
grief." The inspector asked if there had been  anything in Cottard's manner that suggested 
what he called his "intent to felo-de-se."  "He knocked at my door yesterday," Gr and said, "and asked me for a match. I 
gave him a box. He said he was sorry to dist urb me but that, as we  were neighbors, he 
hoped I wouldn't mind. He assured me he'd bring back my box, but I told him to keep it." 
 The inspector asked Grand if he'd noticed anything queer about Cottard. 
 "What struck me as queer was that he  always seemed to want to start a 
conversation. But he should have seen I was busy with my work." Grand turned to Rieux 
and added rather shyly: "Some private work."  The inspector now said that he must see the invalid and hear what he had to say.  Rieux thought it would be wiser to prepar e Cottard for the visit. When he entered 
the bedroom he found Cottard, who was wearing a gray flannel nightshirt, sitting up in 
bed and gazing at the door with a scared expression on his face. 
 "It's the police, isn't it?"  "Yes," Rieux said, "but don't get flustered. There are only some formalities to be gone through, and then you'll be left in peace."  Cottard replied that all this was quite needless, to his thinking, and anyhow he 
didn't like the police.  Rieux showed some irritation.  "I don't love them either. It's only a matte r of answering a few questions as briefly 
and correctly as you can, and th en you'll be through with it." 
 Cottard said nothing and Ri eux began to move to the door. He had hardly taken a 
step when the little man called him back and, as soon as he was at the bedside, gripped 
his hands.  "They can't be rough with an invalid,  a man who's hanged himself, can they, 
doctor?"  Rieux gazed down at him for a moment, then assured him that there was no question of anything like that, and in any case he was here to protect his patient. This 
seemed to relieve Cottard, and Rieu x went out to get the inspector. 
 After Grand's deposition had been read out, Cottard was asked to state the exact 
motive of his act. He merely replied, without l ooking at the police offi cer, that "a secret 
grief" described it well enough. The inspector th en asked him peremptorily if he intended 
to "have another go at it." Showing more an imation, Cottard said certainly not, his one 
wish was to be left in peace.  "Allow me to point out, my man," the polic e officer rejoined with asperity, "that 
just now it's you who're troubling the peace of others." Rieux signed to him not to 
continue, and he left it at that.  "A good hour wasted!" the inspector sighed when the door closed behind them. "As you can guess, we've other things to th ink about, what with this fever everybody's 
talking of."  He then asked the doctor if there wa s any serious danger to the town; Rieux 
answered that he couldn't say.  "It must be the weather," the police officer decided. "That's what it is." 
 No doubt it was the weather. As the da y wore on, everything grew sticky to the 
touch, and Rieux felt his anxiety increasing after each visit. That evening a neighbor of his old patient in the suburb s started vomiting, pressing his hand to his groin, and running 
a high fever accompanied by delirium. The ganglia were much bigger than M. Michel's. One of them was beginning to suppurate, and pr esently split open lik e an overripe fruit. 
On returning to his apartment, Rieux rang up the medical-stores depot for the district. In 
his professional diary for the day the only en try was: "Negative reply." Already he was 
receiving calls for similar cases from various  parts of the town. O bviously the abscesses 
had to be lanced. Two crisscross strokes, and the ganglion disgorged a mixture of blood and pus. Their limbs stretched out as far as  they could manage, the sick man went on 
bleeding. Dark patches appeared on their legs  and stomachs; sometimes a ganglion would 
stop suppurating, then suddenly swell again. Usua lly the sick man died, in a stench of 
corruption.  The local press, so lavish of news about  the rats, now had nothing to say. For rats 
died in the street; men in their homes. A nd newspapers are concerned only with the 
street. Meanwhile, government and municipal of ficials were putting their heads together. 
So long as each individual doctor had come  across only two or three cases, no one had 
thought of taking action. But it was merely a matter of adding up the figures and, once 
this had been done, the total was startling. 
 In a very few days the number of cases had risen by leaps and bounds, and it became evident to all observers of this strange malady that a real epidemic had set in. 
This was the state of affairs when Castel, one of Rieux's colleagues and a much older man than he, came to see him.  "Naturally," he said to Rieux, "you know what it is." 
 "I'm waiting for the result of the post-mortems."  "Well, I know. And I don't need any post-mortems. I was in China for a good part of my career, and I saw some cases in Paris twenty years ago. Only no one dared to call 
them by their name on that occasion. The us ual taboo, of course; the public mustn't be 
alarmed, that wouldn't do at all. And then, as one of my colleagues said, 'It's unthinkable. Everyone knows it's ceased to appear in we stern Europe.' Yes, everyone knew that, 
except the dead men. Come now, Rieux, you know as well as I do what it is." 
 Rieux pondered. He was looking out of the window of his surgery, at the tall cliff that closed the half-circle of the bay on th e far horizon. Though bl ue, the sky had a dull 
sheen that was softening as the light declined. 
 "Yes, Castel," he replied. "It's hardly credible. But everything points to its being plague."  Castel got up and began walking toward the door.  "You know," the old doctor said, "what they 're going to tell us? That it vanished 
from temperate countries long ago." 
 "'Vanished'? What does that word really  mean?" Rieux shrugged his shoulders. 
 "Yes. And don't forget. Just under twenty years ago, in Paris too." 
 "Right. Let's hope it won't prove any worse this time than it did then. But really 
it's incredible."  The word "plague" had just been uttered for the first time. At this stage of the 
narrative, with Dr. Bernard Rieux standing at  his window, the narrator may, perhaps, be 
allowed to justify the doctor's uncertainty and surprise, since, with very slight differences, 
his reaction was the same as that of th e great majority of our townsfolk. Everybody 
knows that pestilences have a way of recurri ng in the world; yet somehow we find it hard 
to believe in ones that crash down on our h eads from a blue sky. There have been as 
many plagues as wars in histor y; yet always plagues and wa rs take people equally by 
surprise.  In fact, like our fellow citizens, Rieu x was caught off his guard, and we should 
understand his hesitations in th e light of this fact; and si milarly understand how he was 
torn between conflicti ng fears and confidence. When a war breaks out, people say: "It's 
too stupid; it can't last long." But though a war may well be "too stupid," that doesn't 
prevent its lasting. Stupidity ha s a knack of getting its way; as we should see if we were 
not always so much wrapped up in ourselves.  In this respect our townsfolk were like everybody else, wrapped up in themselves; in other words they were humanists:  they disbelieved in pestilences.  A pestilence isn't a thing made to man's measure; therefore we tell ourselves that 
pestilence is a mere bogy of the mind, a ba d dream that will pass away. But it doesn't 
always pass away and, from one bad dream to another, it is men who pass away, and the 
humanists first of all, because th ey haven't taken their precautions. 
 Our townsfolk were not more to blame than  others; they forgot to be modest, that 
was all, and thought that ever ything still was possible for them; which presupposed that 
pestilences were impossible. They went on doing business, arranged for journeys, and 
formed views. How should they have given a thought to anything like plague, which rules out any future, cancels journeys, silences  the exchange of views. They fancied 
themselves free, and no one will ever be free so long as there are pestilences. 
 Indeed, even after Dr. Rieux had admitted  in his friend's company that a handful 
of persons, scattered about the town, had wit hout warning died of plague, the danger still 
remained fantastically unreal. For the simple  reason that, when a man is a doctor, he 
comes to have his own ideas of physical suffering, and to acquire somewhat more imagination than the average. Looking from  his window at the town, outwardly quite 
unchanged, the doctor felt little more than a faint qualm for the future, a vague unease.  He tried to recall what he had read a bout the disease. Figures floated across his 
memory, and he recalled that some thirty or so great plagues known to history had 
accounted for nearly a hundred million deaths. But what are a hundred million deaths? When one has served in a war, one hardly knows what a dead man is, after a while. And 
since a dead man has no substance unless one has actually seen him dead, a hundred 
million corpses broadcast through history ar e no more than a puff of smoke in the 
imagination. The doctor remembered the plag ue at Constantinople that, according to 
Procopius, caused ten thousand deaths in a single day. Ten thousand dead made about 
five times the audience in a biggish cine ma. Yes, that was how it should be done. You 
should collect the people at the exits of five  picture-houses, you should lead them to a 
city square and make them die in heaps if  you wanted to get a clear notion of what it 
means. Then at least you could add some familiar faces to the anonymous mass. But 
naturally that was impossible to put into  practice; moreover, what man knows ten 
thousand faces? In any case th e figures of those old historia ns, like Procopius, weren't to 
be relied on; that was common knowledge. Se venty years ago, at Canton, forty thousand 
rats died of plague before the disease spread to the inhabitants. But, again, in the Canton 
epidemic there was no reliable way of counti ng up the rats. A very rough estimate was all 
that could be made, with, obviously, a wide margin for error.  "Let's see," the doctor murmured to himself, "supposing the length of a rat to be ten inches, forty thousand rats placed end to end would make a line of..." 
 He pulled himself up sharply. He was letti ng his imagination play pranks, the last 
thing wanted just now. A few cases, he told hi mself, don't make an epidemic; they merely 
call for serious precautions. He must fix his mind, first of all, on the observed facts: 
stupor and extreme prostration, buboes, intens e thirst, delirium, dark blotches on the 
body, internal dilatation,  and, in conclusion... In conclusion, some words came back to 
the doctor's mind; aptly enough, the concludi ng sentence of the description of the 
symptoms given in his medical handbook: "The  pulse becomes flutte ring, dicrotic, and 
intermittent, and death ensues as the result of the slightest movement." Yes, in conclusion, the patient's life hung on a thre ad, and three people out of four (he remembered the exact figures) were too impatie nt not to make the very slight movement 
that snapped the thread. 
 The doctor was still looking out of  the window. Beyond it lay the tranquil 
radiance of a cool spring sky; inside th e room a word was echoing still, the word 
"plague." A word that conjured up in the doc tor's mind not only what science chose to put 
into it, but a whole series of fantastic possibilities utterly out  of keeping with that gray 
and yellow town under his eyes, from which were rising the sounds  of mild activity 
characteristic of the hour; a drone rather th an a bustling, the noises of a happy town, in 
short, if it's possible to be at once so  dull and happy. A tra nquillity so casual and 
thoughtless seemed almost effortlessly to give the lie to those old pictures of the plague: 
Athens, a charnel-house reeking to heaven and deserted even by the birds; Chinese towns cluttered up with victims silent in their a gony; the convicts at Ma rseille piling rotting 
corpses into pits; the building of the Great Wall in Provence to fend off the furious plague-wind; the damp, putrefying pallets st uck to the mud floor at the Constantinople 
lazar-house, where the patients were hauled up from their beds with hooks; the carnival of masked doctors at the Black Death; men and women copulating in the cemeteries of Milan; cartloads of dead bodies rumbli ng through London's ghoul-h aunted darkness, 
nights and days filled always, everywhere, w ith the eternal cry of human pain. No, all 
those horrors were not near enough as yet even  to ruffle the equanimity of that spring 
afternoon. The clang of an unseen streetcar came through the window, briskly refuting 
cruelty and pain. Only the sea, murmurous behind the dingy checkerboard of houses, told of the unrest, the precariousne ss, of all things in this wo rld. And, gazing in the direction 
of the bay, Dr. Rieux called to mind the plague-fires of which Lucretius tells, which the Athenians kindled on the seashore. The dead we re brought there after nightfall, but there 
was not room enough, and the living fought one another with torches for a space where to 
lay those who had been dear to them; for they  had rather engage in bloody conflicts than 
abandon their dead to the waves. A picture rose  before him of the red glow of the pyres 
mirrored on a wine-dark, slumbrous sea, battling torches whirling sparks across the darkness, and thick, fetid smoke rising toward  the watchful sky. Yes, it was not beyond 
the bounds of possibility....  But these extravagant forebodings dwindled  in the light of reason. True, the word 
"plague" had been uttered; true, at this ve ry moment one or two victims were being 
seized and laid low by the disease. Still, that could stop, or be  stopped. It was only a 
matter of lucidly recognizing what had to be recognized; of dispelling extraneous 
shadows and doing what needed to be done. Then the plague would come to an end, 
because it was unthinkable, or, rather, because  one thought of it on misleading lines. If, as 
was most likely, it died out, all would be we ll. If not, one would know it anyhow for what 
it was and what steps should be taken for coping with and finally overcoming it.  The doctor opened the window, and at once the noises of the town grew louder. 
 The brief, intermittent sibilance of a machine-saw came from a near-by workshop. 
 Rieux pulled himself together. There la y certitude; there, in the daily round. 
 All the rest hung on mere th reads and trivial contingencies; you couldn't waste 
your time on it. The thing was to do your job as it should be done. 
 The doctor's musings had reached this point when the visit of Joseph Grand was announced. Grand's duties as clerk in the M unicipal Office were varied, and he was 
sometimes employed in the statistical depa rtment on compiling the figures of births, marriages, and deaths. Thus it had fallen to him to add up the number of deaths during 
the last few days, and, being of an obligi ng disposition, he had volunteered to bring a 
copy of the latest figures to the doctor. 
 Grand, who was waving a sheet of paper, was accompanied by his neighbor, Cottard.  "The figures are going up, doctor. El even deaths in forty-eight hours." 
 Rieux shook hands with Cottard and aske d him how he was feeling. Grand put in 
a word explaining that Cottard was bent on thanking the doctor and apologizing for the 
trouble he had given. But Rieux was gazing fr owningly at the figures on the sheet of 
paper.  "Well," he said, "perhaps we'd better make up our minds to call this disease by its name. So far we've been only shillyshallying. L ook here, I'm off to the laboratory; like to 
come with me?"  "Quite so, quite so," Grand said as he went down the stairs at the doctor's heels. 
"I, too, believe in calling things by their na me. But what's the name in this case?" 
 "That I shan't say, and anyhow you wouldn't gain, anything by knowing."  "You see," Grand smiled. "It's not so easy after all!"  They started off toward the Place d'Armes. Cottard still kept silent. The streets were beginning to fill up. The brief dusk of our town was already giving place to night, 
and the first stars glimmered above the still clearly marked  horizon. A few moments later 
all the street-lamps went on, dimming the sky, an d the voices in the street seemed to rise 
a tone.  "Excuse me," Grand said at the corner of  the Place d'Armes, "but I must catch my 
car now. My evenings are sacred. As we say in  my part of the world: 'Never put off to 
tomorrow?'"  Rieux had already noticed Grand's trick of professing to quote some turn of 
speech from "his part of the world" (he ha iled from Montélimar), and following up with 
some such hackneyed expression as "lost in dreams," or "pretty as a picture." 
 "That's so," Cottard put in. "You can ne ver budge him from his den after dinner." 
 Rieux asked Grand if he was doing extra work for the municipality. Grand said 
no, he was working on his own account.  "Really?" Rieux said, to keep the conversation going. "And are you getting on 
well with it?"  "Considering I've been at it for year s, it would be surp rising if I wasn't. 
 Though in one sense there hasn't been much progress."  "May one know", the doctor halted, "what it is that you' re engaged on?" 
 Grand put a hand up to his hat and tu gged it down upon his big, protruding ears, 
then murmured some half-inaudible remark from which Rieux seemed to gather that Grand's work was connected with "the growth of a personality." Then he turned rather 
hastily and a moment later was hurrying, with short, quick steps, under the fig trees lining the boulevard de la Marne.  When they were at the laboratory gate , Cottard told the doctor that he would 
greatly like to see him and ask his advice about something. Rieux, who was fingering in 
his pocket the sheet of paper with the figures on it, said  he'd better call during his 
consulting-hours; then, changing his mind, told him he would be in his part of the town 
next day and would drop in to see him at the end of the afternoon.  On leaving Cottard the doc tor noticed that he was thinking of Grand, trying to 
picture him in the midst of an outbreak of pl ague, not an outbreak like the present one, 
which would probably not prove serious, but like  one of the great visitations of the past. 
"He's the kind of man who always escapes in such cases." Rieux remembered having read 
somewhere that the plague spared weak cons titutions and chose its victims chiefly among 
the robust. Still thinki ng of Grand, he decided that he wa s something of a "mystery man" 
in his small way. 
 True, at first sight, Gran d manifested both the outwar d signs and typical manner 
of a humble employee in the local administra tion. Tall and thin, he seemed lost in the 
garments that he always chose a size too la rge, under the illusion that they would wear 
longer. Though he still had most of the teeth in his lower jaw, all the upper ones were 
gone, with the result that when he smiled, ra ising his upper lip, the lower scarcely moved, 
his mouth looked like a small black hole let into  his face. Also he had the walk of a shy 
young priest, sidling along walls and slipping mouse-like into doorways, and he exuded a 
faint odor of smoke and basement rooms; in  short, he had all the attributes of 
insignificance. Indeed, it cost an effort to picture him otherwise than bent over a desk, studiously revising the tariff of the town bath s or gathering for a junior secretary the 
materials of a report on the new garbage-co llection tax. Even before you knew what his 
employment was, you had a feeling that he'd  been brought into the world for the sole 
purpose of performing the discreet but needfu l duties of a temporary assistant municipal 
clerk on a salary of sixty-two francs, thirty centimes a day. 
 This was, in fact, the entry that he made each month in the staff register at the Municipal Office, in the column Post in Which Employed. When twenty-two years previously, after obtaining a matriculation certificate beyond which, fo r lack of money, 
he was unable to progress, he was given this te mporary post, he had b een led to expect, or 
so he said, speedy "confirmation" in it. It wa s only a matter of provi ng his ability to cope 
with the delicate problems raised by the admi nistration of our city. Once confirmed, they 
had assured him, he couldn't fail to be promoted  to a grade that would enable him to live 
quite comfortably.  Ambition, certainly, was not the spur that  activated Joseph Grand; that he would 
swear to, wryly smiling. All he desired was the prospect of a life suitably insured on the 
material side by honest work, enabling him to devote his leisure to his hobbies. If he'd accepted the post offered him, it was from honorable motives and, if he might say so, loyalty to an ideal.  But this "temporary" state of things ha d gone on and on, the cost of living rose by 
leaps and bounds, and Grand's pay, in spite of  some statutory rises, was still a mere 
pittance. He had confided this to Rieux, but nobody else seemed aw are of his position. 
And here lies Grand's originality, or anyhow an  indication of it. He could certainly have 
brought to official notice, if not his rights, of  which he wasn't sure, at least the promises 
given him. But, for one thing, the department al head who had made them had been dead 
for some time and, furthermore, Grand no l onger remembered their exact terms. And 
lastly, this was the real trouble, Joseph Grand couldn't find his words.  This peculiarity, as Rieux had noticed, was really the key to the personality of our 
worthy fellow citizen. And this it was which always prevented him from writing the mildly protesting letter he had in mind, or taking the steps the situation called for. 
According to him, he felt a particular aver sion from talking about his "rights", the word was one that gave him pause, and likewise  from mentioning a "promise", which would 
have implied that he was claiming his due a nd thus bespoken an audacity incompatible 
with the humble post he filled. 
 On the other hand, he refused to us e expressions such as "your kindness," 
"gratitude," or even "solicit," which, to his thinking, were incompatible with his personal 
dignity. Thus, owing to his inability to find the right words, he had gone on performing 
his obscure, ill-paid duties unt il a somewhat advanced age. Also this, anyhow, was what 
he told Dr. Rieux he had come, after long e xperience, to realize th at he could always 
count on living within his means; all he had to do was to scale down his needs to his 
income. Thus he confirmed the wisdom of an opinion often voiced by our mayor, a 
business magnate of the town, when he insisted  vehemently that in the last analysis (he 
emphasized this choice expression, which inde ed clinched his argument, there was no 
reason to believe that anyone had ever di ed of hunger in the town. In any case, the 
austere, not to say ascetic life of Joseph Gr and was, in the last analysis, a guarantee 
against any anxiety in this respect. He went on looking for his words. 
 In a certain sense it might well be said that his was an exemplary life. He was one 
of those rare people, rare in our town as elsewhere, who have the courage of their good 
feelings. What little he to ld of his personal life vouched for acts of kindness and a 
capacity for affection that no one in our times  dares own to. Without a blush he confessed 
to dearly loving his nephews and sister, his only surviving near relation, whom he went to France to visit every other year.  He admitted that the thought of his parents, whom he lost when he was very young, often gave him a pang. He did not conceal the fact that he had a special affection 
for a church bell in his part of the town which started pealing very melodiously at about five every afternoon. Yet to express such emotions, simple as they were, the least word cost him a terrible effort. And this difficulty in  finding his words had come to be the bane 
of his life. "Oh, doctor," he would exclaim, " how I'd like to learn to express myself!" He 
brought the subject up each time he met Rieux.  That evening, as he watched Grand's receding form, it flashed on the doctor what it was that Grand was trying to convey; he was evidently writing a book or something of 
the sort. And quaintly enough, as he made his way to the laboratory, this thought 
reassured him. He realized how absurd it was, but he simply couldn't believe that a pestilence on the great scale could befall a town where people like Grand were to be found, obscure functionaries cultivating ha rmless eccentricities. To be precise, he 
couldn't picture such eccentricities existi ng in a plague-stricken community, and he 
concluded that the chances were all agains t the plague's making any headway among our 
fellow citizens.   NEXT day, by dint of a persistence that many thought ill-advised, Rieux persuaded the 
authorities to convene a health committee at the Prefect's office. 
 "People in town are getting nervous, that 's a fact," Dr. Richard admitted. "And of 
course all sorts of wild rumors are going round. The Prefect said to me, 'Take prompt 
action if you like, but don't attr act attention.' He personally is convinced that it's a false 
alarm."  Rieux gave Castel a lift to the Prefect's office.  "Do you know," Castel said when they were  in the car, "that we haven't a gram of 
serum in the whole district?" 
 "I know. I rang up the depot. The director s eemed quite startled. It'll have to be 
sent from Paris."  "Let's hope they're quick about it."  "I sent a wire yesterday," Rieux said.  The Prefect greeted them amiably enough, but one could see his nerves were on 
edge.  "Let's make a start, gentlemen," he  said. "Need I review the situation?" 
 Richard thought that wasn't necessar y. He and his colleagues were acquainted 
with the facts. The only question wa s what measures should be adopted. 
 "The question," old Castel cut in almost rudely, "is to know whet her it's plague or 
not."  Two or three of the doctors present protested. The others seemed to hesitate.  The Prefect gave a start and hurriedly glan ced toward the door to make sure it had 
prevented this outrageous remark from being overheard in the corridor Richard said that 
in his opinion the great thing was not to take an alarmist view. All that could be said at 
present was that we had to deal with a special type of fever,  with inguinal complications; 
in medical science, as in daily life, it was unwise to jump to conclusions. Old Castel, who 
was placidly chewing his draggled yellow must ache, raised his pale, bright eyes and 
gazed at Rieux.  Then, after sweeping the other members of the committee with a friendly glance, 
he said that he knew quite we ll that it was plague and, needless to say, he also knew that, 
were this to be officially admitted, the author ities would be compelled to take very drastic 
steps. This was, of course, the explanation of his colleagues' reluctance to face the facts 
and, if it would ease their minds, he was quite  prepared to say it wasn't plague. The 
Prefect seemed ruffled and remarked that, in any case, this line of argument seemed to 
him unsound.  "The important thing," Castel replied,  "isn't the soundness or otherwise of the 
argument, but for it to make you think." Rie ux, who had said nothing so far, was asked 
for his opinion.  "We are dealing," he said, "with a fe ver of a typhoidal nature, accompanied by 
vomiting and buboes. I have incised thes e buboes and had the pus analyzed; our 
laboratory analyst believes he has identifie d the plague bacillus.  But I am bound to add 
that there are specific modificat ions that don't quite tally with  the classical description of 
the plague bacillus."  Richard pointed out that th is justified a policy of wait-and-see; anyhow, it would 
be wise to await the statistical report on the series of analyses that had been going on for 
several days.  "When a microbe," Rieux said, "after a short intermission can quadruple in three 
days' time the volume of the spleen, can swell the mesenteric ganglia to the size of an 
orange and give them the consistency of gruel,  a policy of wait-and-see is, to say the least 
of it, unwise. The foci of infection are st eadily extending. Judging by the rapidity with 
which the disease is spreading, it may well, unless we can stop it, kill off half the town before two months are out. That being s o, it has small importance whether you call it plague or some rare kind of fever. The important  thing is to prevent its killing off half the 
population of this town." 
 Richard said it was a mistake to paint too gloomy a picture, and, moreover, the 
disease hadn't been proved to be contagious; indeed, relatives of hi s patients, living under 
the same roof, had escaped it.  "But others have died ," Rieux observed. "And obvious ly contagion is never 
absolute; otherwise you'd have a constant ma thematical progression and the death-rate 
would rocket up catastrophically. It's not a question of painting too black a picture. It's a question of taking precautions."  Richard, however, summing up the situation as he saw it, pointed out that, if the 
epidemic did not cease spontaneously, it w ould be necessary to apply the rigorous 
prophylactic measures laid down in the Code. And, to do this, it would be necessary to 
admit officially that plague had broken out. But of this there was no absolute certainty; 
therefore any hasty actio n was to be deprecated. 
 Rieux stuck to his guns. "The  point isn't whether the measures provided for in the 
Code are rigorous, but whether they are n eedful to prevent the death of half the 
population. All the rest is a ma tter of administrative action, and I needn't remind you that 
our constitution has provided for such emer gencies by empowering prefects to issue the 
necessary orders."  "Quite true," the Prefect assented, "but I shall need your professional declaration 
that the epidemic is one of plague."  "If we don't make that declaration," Rie ux said, "there's a risk that half the 
population may be wiped out."  Richard cut in with some impatience.  "The truth is that our colleague is conv inced it's plague; his description of the 
syndrome proved it." 
 Rieux replied that he had not described a "syndrome," but merely what he'd seen 
with his own eyes. And what he'd seen was buboes, and high fever accompanied by 
delirium, ending fatally within forty-eight hours. Could Dr. Richard take the 
responsibility of declaring that the epidem ic would die out without the imposition of 
rigorous prophylactic measures?  Richard hesitated, then fixed his eyes on Rieux.  "Please answer me quite frankly. Are you absolutely convinced it's plague?" 
 "You're stating the problem wrongly. It's not  a question of the term I use; it's a 
question of time."  "Your view, I take it," the Prefect put in, "is this. Ev en if it isn't plague, the 
prophylactic measures enjoined by law for copi ng with a state of plague should be put 
into force immediately?"  "If you insist on my having a View,'  that conveys it accurately enough." 
 The doctors confabulated. Richard was their spokesman: 
 "It comes to this. We are to take the responsibility of acting as though the 
epidemic were plague."  This way of putting it met with general approval.  "It doesn't matter to me," Rieux said, "how you phrase it. My point is that we 
should not act as if there were no likelihood th at half the populati on would be wiped out; 
for then it would be."  Followed by scowls and protestations, Rieux left the committee-room. Some 
minutes later, as he was driving down a back street redolent of fried fish and urine, a 
woman screaming in agony, her groin dripping blood, stretched out her arms toward him. 
 
 ON the day after the committee meeting the fever notched another small advance. 
 It even found its way into the papers, but  discreetly; only a few brief references to 
it were made. On the following day, however, Rieux observed that small official notices had been just put up about the town, though in  places where they would not attract much 
attention. It was hard to find in these notic es any indication that the authorities were 
facing the situation squarely.  The measures enjoined were far from Draconian and one had the feeling that 
many concessions had been made to a desire  not to alarm the public. The instructions 
began with a bald statement that a few cases of a malignant fever had been reported in Oran; it was not possible as yet to say if th is fever was contagious. The symptoms were 
not so marked as to be really perturbing and the authorities felt sure they could rely on 
the townspeople to treat the situ ation with composure. None th e less, guided by a spirit of 
prudence that all would apprec iate, the Prefect was putting into force some precautionary 
measures. If these measures were carefully  studied and properly applied, they would 
obviate any risk of an epidemic. This being so, the Prefect felt no doubt that everybody in 
his jurisdiction would wholehearted ly second his personal efforts. 
 The notice outlined the general program that the authorities had drawn up. It 
included a systematic extermination of the ra t population by injecting poison gas into the 
sewers, and a strict supervis ion of the water-supply. The townspeople were advised to 
practice extreme cleanliness, a nd any who found fleas on their persons were directed to 
call at the municipal dispensa ries. Also heads of households were ordered promptly to 
report any fever case diagnosed  by their doctors and to pe rmit the isolation of sick 
members of their families in special wards at the hospital. These wards, it was explained, were equipped to provide pa tients with immediate treatment and ensure the maximum 
prospect of recovery. Some supplementary re gulations enjoined compulsory disinfection 
of the sickroom and of the vehicle in which the patient traveled.  For the rest, the Prefect c onfined himself to advising all who had been in contact 
with the patient to consult the sanitary in spector and strictly to follow his advice. 
 Dr. Rieux swung round brusquely from the poster and started back to his surgery.  Grand, who was awaiting him there, raised his arms dramatically when the doctor entered.  "Yes," Rieux said, "I kn ow. The figures are rising." 
 On the previous day ten deaths had been  reported. The doctor told Grand that he 
might be seeing him in the evening, as he had promised to visit Cottard.  "An excellent idea," Grand said. "You' ll do him good. As a matter of fact, I find 
him greatly changed."  "In what way?"  "He's become amiable."  "Wasn't he amiable before?"  Grand seemed at a loss. He couldn't say that Cottard used to be unamiable; the 
term wouldn't have been correct. But Cottard was a silent, secretive man, with something about him that made Grand think of a w ild boar. His bedroom, meals at a cheap 
restaurant, some rather myst erious comings and goings, these were the sum of Cottard's 
days. He described himself as a traveling salesman in wines and spirits. Now and then he 
was visited by two or three men, presumably customers.  Sometimes in the evening he would go to a movie across the way. In this 
connection Grand mentioned a detail he had noticed, that Cottard seemed to have a 
preference for gangster films. But the thing that had struck  him most about the man was 
his aloofness, not to say his mi strust of everyone he met. 
 And now, so Grand said, there had been a complete change.  "I don't quite know how to put it, but I must say I've an impression that he is trying to make himself agreeable to all and sundry, to be in everybody's good books. Nowadays he often talks to me, he suggests we should go out together, and I can't bring 
myself to refuse. What's more, he intere sts me, and of course I saved his life." 
 Since his attempt at suicide Cottard had had no more visitors. In the streets, in 
shops, he was always trying to strike up friends hips. To the grocer he was all affability; 
no one could take more pains than he to s how his interest in the tobacconist's gossip. 
 "This particular tobacconist, a woman, by the way," Grand explained, "is a holy 
terror. I told Cottard so, but he replied that I was prejudi ced and she had plenty of good 
points, only one had to find them out."  On two or three occasions Cottard had invited Grand to come with him to the luxury restaurants and cafes of the town, whic h he had recently taken to patronizing. 
 "There's a pleasant atmosphere in them ," he explained, "and then one's in good 
company."  Grand noticed that the st aff made much of Cottard and he soon discovered why, 
when he saw the lavish tips his companion ga ve. The traveling salesman seemed greatly 
to appreciate the amiability shown him in return for his largesse. One day when the head 
waiter had escorted him to the door and helped  him into his overcoat, Cottard said to 
Grand: 
 "He's a nice fellow, and he'd make a good witness." 
 "A witness? I don't follow."  Cottard hesitated before answering.  "Well, he could say I'm not really a bad kind of man."  But his humor had its ups and downs. One day when the grocer had shown less affability, he came home in a tearing rage.  "He's siding with the others, the swine!"  "With what others?"  "The whole damned lot of them."  Grand had personally witnessed an odd s cene that took place at the tobacconist's. 
An animated conversation was in progress and the woman behind the counter started 
airing her views about a murder case that had created some stir in Algiers. A young 
commercial employee had killed an Algerian on a beach.  "I always say," the woman began, "if they  clapped all that scum in jail, decent 
folks could breathe more freely."  She was too much startled by Cottard's reaction, he dashed out of the shop without a word of excuse, to continue. Grand and the woman gazed after him, dumbfounded.  Subsequently Grand reported to the docto r other changes in Cottard's character. 
 Cottard had always professed very libe ral ideas, as his pet dictum on economic 
questions, "Big fish eat little fish," implie d. But now the only Oran newspaper he bought 
was the conservative organ, and one could hardly help suspecti ng that he made a point of 
reading it in public places. Somewhat of the same order was a request he made to Grand 
shortly before he left his sick-bed; Grand mentioned he was going to the post office and Cottard asked him to be kind enough to dispat ch a money order for a hundred francs to a 
sister living at a distance, me ntioning that he sent her th is sum every month. Then, just 
when Grand was leaving the room, he called him back.  "No, send her two hundred francs. That'll be a nice surprise for her. She believes I never give her a thought. But actually I'm devoted to her." 
 Not long after this he made some curi ous remarks to Grand in the course of 
conversation. He had badgered Grand into te lling him about the somewhat mysterious 
"private work" to which Grand gave his evenings. 
 "I know!" Cottard exclaimed. "Y ou're writing a book, aren't you?" 
 "Something of the kind. But it's not so simple as that."  "Ah!" Cottard sighed. "I only wi sh I had a knack for writing." 
 When Grand showed his surprise, Cotta rd explained with some embarrassment 
that being a literary man must make  things easier in lots of ways. 
 "Why?" Grand asked.  "Why, because an author has more rights than ordinary people, as everybody knows. People will stand much more from him."  "It looks," said Rieux to Grand on the morning when the official notices were 
posted, "as if this business of the rats had addled his brain, as it has done for so many 
other people. That's all it is. Or perhaps he's scared of the 'fever.'"  "I doubt it, doctor. If you want to know my opinion, he?" 
 He paused; with a machine-gun rattle from  its exhaust the "der atization" van was 
clattering by. Rieux kept silent  until it was possible to make himself audible, then asked, 
without much interest, what Grand's opinion was.  "He's a man with something pretty serious on his consci ence," Grand said gravely. 
 The doctor shrugged his shoulders. As the inspector had said, he'd other fish to 
fry.  That afternoon Rieux had another talk with Castel. The serum had not yet come. 
 "In any case," Rieux said, "I wonder if it wi ll be much use. This bacillus is such a 
queer one."  "There," Castel said, "I don't agree with you. These little brutes always have an air 
of originality. But, at bottom,  it's always the same thing." 
 "That's your theory, anyhow. Actually, of  course, we know next to nothing on the 
subject."  "I grant you, it's only my theory. Sti ll, in a sense, that goes for everybody." 
 Throughout the day the doctor was conscious that the slightly dazed feeling that 
came over him whenever he thought about the plague was growing more pronounced. 
 Finally he realized that he was afra id! On two occasions he entered crowded 
cafes. Like Cottard he felt a need for friendl y contacts, human warmth. A stupid instinct, 
Rieux told himself; still, it served to remind hi m that he'd promised to visit the traveling 
salesman.  Cottard was standing beside the dining-t able when the doctor entered his room 
that evening. A detective story lay open on the tablecloth. But the night was closing in 
and it would have been difficult to  read in the growing darkness. 
 Most likely Cottard had been sitting musing in the twilight until he heard the ring 
at his door. Rieux asked how he was fee ling. Cottard sat down and replied rather 
grumpily that he was feeling tolerably well, ad ding that he'd feel still better if only he 
could be sure of being left in peace. Rieux remarked that one couldn't always be alone.  "That's not what I meant. I was thinki ng of people who take an interest in you 
only to make trouble for you." When Rieux said nothing, he went on: "Mind you, that's 
not my case. Only I've been reading that detective story. It's a bout a poor devil who's 
arrested one fine morning, all of a sudden. Pe ople had been taking an interest in him and 
he knew nothing about it. They were talking about him in o ffices, entering his name on 
card indexes. Now, do you think that's fair? Do you think people have a right to treat a 
man like that?"  "Well," Rieux said, "that depends. In one sense I agree, nobody has the right. 
 But all that's beside the mark. What's  important is for you to go out a bit. 
 It's a mistake staying indoors too much."  Cottard seemed vexed and said that on the contrary he was always going out, and, 
if need arose, all the people in the street could vouch for him. What's more, he knew lots 
of people in other parts of the town.  "Do you know Monsieur Rigaud, the ar chitect? He's a friend of mine." 
 The room was in almost complete dar kness. Outside, the street was growing 
noisier and a sort of murmur of relief greeted  the moment when all the street-lamps lit up, 
all together. Rieux went out on the balcony, and Cottard followed him. 
 From the outlying districts, as happens every evening in our town, a gentle breeze wafted a murmur of voices, smells of ro asting meat, a gay, perfumed tide of freedom 
sounding on its way, as the streets filled up with noisy young people released from shops 
and offices. Nightfall, with its deep, remote baying of unseen ships, the rumor rising from 
the sea, and the happy tumult of  the crowd, that first hour of darkness which in the past 
had always had a special charm for Rieux, s eemed today charged with menace, because 
of all he knew.  "How about turning on the lights?" he s uggested when they went back into the 
room.  After this had been done, the little man gazed at him, blinking his eyes.  "Tell me, doctor. Suppose I fell ill, would you put me in your ward at the hospital?"  "Why not?"  Cottard then inquired if it ever happene d that a person in a hospital or a nursing 
home was arrested. Rieux said it had b een known to happen, but all depended on the 
invalid's condition.  "You know, doctor," Cottard said, "I've confidence in you." Then he asked the 
doctor if he'd be kind enough to give hi m a lift, as he was going into town. 
 In the center of the town the streets were already growing less crowded and the 
lights fewer. Children were playing in front of the doorways. At Cottard's request the doctor stopped his car beside one of the groups of children. They were playing hopscotch and making a great deal of noise. One of them , a boy with sleek, neatly parted hair and a 
grubby face, stared hard at Rieux with br ight, bold eyes. The doctor looked away. 
 Standing on the sidewalk Cottard shook his head. He then said in a hoarse, rather 
labored voice, casting uneasy glances over his shoulder: 
 "Everybody's talking about an epidemic. Is there anything in it, doctor?" 
 "People always talk," Rieux repl ied. "That's only to be expected." 
 "You're right. And if we have ten deaths they'll think it's the end of the world. But 
it's not that we need here."  The engine was ticking over. Rieux ha d his hand on the clutch. But he was 
looking again at the boy who was still watchi ng him with an oddly grave intentness. 
Suddenly, unexpectedly, the child smiled, showing all his teeth. 
 "Yes? And what do we need here?" Ri eux asked, returning the child's smile. 
 Abruptly Cottard gripped the door of the car and, as he turned to go, almost shouted in a rageful, passionate voice:  "An earthquake! A big one!"  There was no earthquake, and the whole of  the following day was spent, so far as 
Rieux was concerned, in long driv es to every corner of the to wn, in parleyings with the 
families of the sick and arguments with th e invalids themselves. Never had Rieux known 
his profession to weigh on him so heavily. Hith erto his patients had helped to lighten his 
task; they gladly put themselves into his ha nds. For the first time the doctor felt they were 
keeping aloof, wrapping themselves up in thei r malady with a sort of bemused hostility. It 
was a struggle to which he wasn't yet accu stomed. And when, at ten that evening, he 
parked his car outside the home of his old asth ma patient, his last visit of the day, it was 
an effort for Rieux to drag himself from his seat. For some moments he lingered, gazing 
up the dark street, watching th e stars appear and disappear in the blackness of the sky. 
 When Rieux entered the room, the old man was sitting up in bed, at his usual 
occupation, counting out dried peas from one pan to another. On seeing his visitor he 
looked up, beaming with delight.  "Well, doctor? It's cholera, isn't it?"  "Where on earth did you get that idea from?"  "It's in the paper, and the radio said it, too." 
 "No, it's not cholera."  "Anyhow," the old man chuckled excite dly, "the big bugs ar e laying it on thick. 
 Got the jitters, haven't they?"  "Don't you believe a word of it," the doctor said.  He had examined the old man and now wa s sitting in the middle of the dingy little 
dining-room. Yes, despite what he had said, he  was afraid. He knew that in this suburb 
alone eight or ten unhappy people, coweri ng over their buboes, would be awaiting his 
visit next morning. In only two or three cases had incision of the buboes caused any improvement. For most of them it would mean  going to the hospital, and he knew how 
poor people feel about hospitals. "I don't want  them trying their experiments on him," had 
said the wife one of his patients. But he woul dn't be experimented on; he would die, that 
was all. That the regulations now in force we re inadequate was lamentably clear. As for 
the "specially equipped" wards, he knew wh at they amounted to: two outbuildings from 
which the other patients had been ha stily evacuated, whose windows had been 
hermetically sealed, and round which a sanita ry cordon had been set. The only hope was that the outbreak would die a natural death;  it certainly wouldn't be arrested by the 
measures the authorities had so far devised. 
 Nevertheless, that night the official  communique was still optimistic. On the 
following day Ransdoc announced that the ru les laid down by the local administration 
had won general approval and already thirty sick persons  had reported. Castel rang up 
Rieux.  "How many beds are ther e in the special wards?" 
 "Eighty."  "Surely there are far more than  thirty cases in the town?" 
 "Don't forget there are two sorts of cases: those who take fright, and those, they're 
the majority, who don't have time to do so."  "I see. Are they ch ecking up on the burials?" 
 "No. I told Richard over the phone that en ergetic measures were needed, not just 
words; we'd got to set up a real barrier agai nst the disease, otherwise we might just as 
well do nothing."  "Yes? And what did he say?"  "Nothing doing. He hadn't the powers. In my opinion, it's going to get worse." 
 That was so. Within three days both ward s were full. According to Richard, there 
was talk of requisitioning a school and opening an auxiliary hospital. Meanwhile Rieux continued incising buboes and wait ing for the anti-plague serum.  Castel went back to his 
old books and spent long hour s in the public library. 
 "Those rats died of plague ," was his conclusion, "or of  something extremely like 
it. And they've loosed on the town tens of thousands of fleas, which will spread the infection in geometrical progressi on unless it's checked in time." 
 Rieux said nothing.  About this time the weather appeared set fair, and the sun had drawn up the last 
puddles left by the recent rain. There was a serene blue sky flooded with golden light 
each morning, with sometimes a drone of planes  in the rising heat, all seemed well with 
the world. And yet within four days the feve r had made four star tling strides: sixteen 
deaths, twenty-four, twenty-ei ght, and thirty-two. On the f ourth day the opening of the 
auxiliary hospital in the premises of a primary school was of ficially announced. The local 
population, who so far had made a point of ma sking their anxiety by facetious comments, 
now seemed tongue-tied and went their ways with gloomy faces. 
 Rieux decided to ring up the Prefect. 
 "The regulations don't go anywhere near far enough."  "Yes," the Prefect replied. "I've seen th e statistics and, as you say, they're most 
perturbing."  "They're more than perturbing; they're conclusive."  "I'll ask government for orders."  When Rieux next met Castel, the Prefect's remark was still rankling.  "Orders!" he said scornfully. "When what's needed is imagination."  "Any news of the serum?"  "It'll come this week."  The Prefect sent instructions to Rieu x, through Richard, asking him to draw up a 
minute to be transmitted for orders to the central administration of the colony.  Rieux included in it a clinical diagnosis and statistics of the epidemic. On that day 
forty deaths were reported. The Prefect took the responsibility, as he put it, of tightening 
up the new regulations. Compulsory declaration of all cases of fever and their isolation 
were to be strictly enforced. The residen ces of sick people were to be shut up and 
disinfected; persons living in the same house we re to go into quarantine; burials were to 
be supervised by the local authorities in a manner which will be de scribed later on. Next 
day the serum arrived by plane. There wa s enough for immediate requirements, but not 
enough if the epidemic were to spread. In reply to his telegram Rieux was informed that 
the emergency reserve stock was exhausted, bu t that a new supply was in preparation. 
 Meanwhile, from all the outlying district s, spring was making its progress into the 
town. Thousands of roses wilted in the flowe r-venders' baskets in the market-places and 
along the streets, and the air was heavy with  their cloying perfume. Outwardly, indeed, 
this spring was like any other. The streetcars  were always packed at the rush hours, 
empty and untidy during the rest of the day. Tarrou watched the little old man, and the little old man spat on the cats. Grand hurri ed home every evening to his mysterious 
literary activities. Cottard went his usual de sultory ways, and M. Othon, the magistrate, 
continued to parade his menagerie.  The old Spaniard decanted his dried peas from pan to pan, and sometimes you encountered Rambert, the j ournalist, looking interested as ever in all he saw. 
 In the evening the usual crowd thronged the streets and the lines lengthened 
outside the picture-houses. Moreover, the epid emic seemed to be on the wane; on some 
days only ten or so deaths were notified. Then, all of a sudden, the figure shot up again, vertically. On the day when the death-roll touched thirty, Dr. Rie ux read an official 
telegram that the Prefect had just handed him, remarking: 
 "So they've got alarmed at last." The tele gram ran: Proclaim a state of plague stop 
close the town. 
 
 PART II  >From now on, it can be said that  plague was the concern of a ll of us. Hitherto, surprised 
as he may have been by the strange things happening around him, each individual citizen had gone about his business as usual, so far as this was possible. And no doubt he would have continued doing so. But once the town gates were shut, every one of us realized that 
all, the narrator included, were, so to spea k, in the same boat, and each would have to 
adapt himself to the new conditions of life. Thus, for example, a feeling normally as 
individual as the ache of separation from t hose one loves suddenly became a feeling in 
which all shared alike an d, together with fear, the greatest  affliction of the long period of 
exile that lay ahead.  One of the most striking consequences of the closing of the gates was, in fact, this 
sudden deprivation befalling people who were completely unprepared for it. 
 Mothers and children, lovers, husbands and wives, who had a few days previously 
taken it for granted that their parting woul d be a short one, who had kissed one another 
good-by on the platform and exchanged a few trivia l remarks, sure as they were of seeing 
one another again after a few days or, at most, a few weeks, duped by our blind human faith in the near future and little if at all diverted from their normal interests by this leave-taking, all these people found themselves, without the l east warning, hopelessly cut off, 
prevented from seeing one another again, or even communicating with one another. For 
actually the closing of the gates took place some  hours before the official order was made 
known to the public, and, natura lly enough, it was impossible to take individual cases of 
hardship into account. It might inde ed be said that the first effect of this brutal visitation 
was to compel our townspeople to act as if they had no feelings as individuals. 
 During the first part of the day on which the prohibition to leave the town came 
into force the Prefect's office was besieged by a crowd of applicants advancing pleas of 
equal cogency but equally impossible to take into consideration.  Indeed, it needed several days for us to realize that we were completely cornered; 
that words like "special arrangements," "fa vor," and "priority" had lost all effective 
meaning.  Even the small satisfaction of writing letters was denied us. It came to this: not only had the town ceased to be in touch with the rest of the world by normal means of communication, but also, according to a second notification, all correspondence was forbidden, to obviate the risk of  letters carrying in fection outside the town. In the early 
days a favored few managed to persuade the se ntries at the gates to allow them to get 
messages through to the outside world. But that was only at the beginning of the 
epidemic, when the sentries found it natural to obey their feelings of  humanity. Later on, 
when these same sentries had had the gravit y of the situation drummed into them, they 
flatly refused to take responsibilities whose possible after-effects they could not foresee. 
At first, telephone calls to other towns were allowed, but this led to such crowding of the 
telephone booths and delays on th e lines that for some days they also were prohibited, 
and thereafter limited to what were called "u rgent cases," such as deaths, marriages, and 
births. So we had to fall back on telegrams.  People linked together by friendship, a ffection, or physical love found themselves 
reduced to hunting for tokens of their past communion within the compass of a ten-word 
telegram. And since, in practice, the phrases one can use in a telegram are quickly exhausted, long lives passed side by side, or passionate yearnings, soon declined to the 
exchange of such trite formulas as: "Am well. Always thinking of you. Love." 
 Some few of us, however, persisted in  writing letters and gave much time to 
hatching plans for corresponding with the outside  world; but almost always these plans 
came to nothing. Even on the rare occasions when they succeeded, we could not know this, since we received no answer. For w eeks on end we were reduced to starting the 
same letter over and over again recopying the same scraps of news and the same personal 
appeals, with the result that after a certain time the living words, into which we had as it were transfused our hearts' blood, were drai ned of any meaning. Thereafter we went on 
copying them mechanically, trying, through the dead phrases, to convey some notion of 
our ordeal. And in the long run, to these st erile, reiterated monologues, these futile 
colloquies with a blank wall, even the bana l formulas of a telegram came to seem 
preferable.  Also, after some days, when it was clear  that no one had the least hope of being 
able to leave our town, inquiries began to be  made whether the retu rn of people who had 
gone away before the outbreak would be permitted. After some days' consideration of the matter the authorities replied affirmatively. Th ey pointed out, however, that in no case 
would persons who returned be allowed to leave the town again; once here, they would have to stay, whatever happened. Some families, actually very few, refused to take the 
position seriously and in their eagerness to have the absent members of the family with them again, cast prudence to the winds and wired to them to take this opportunity of returning. But very soon those who were pris oners of the plague re alized the terrible 
danger to which this would expose their relativ es, and sadly resigned themselves to their 
absence. At the height of the epidemic we saw only one case in which natural emotions overcame the fear of death in  a particularly painful form. It was not, as might be 
expected, the case of two young people, whose passion made them yearn for each other's nearness at whatever cost of pain. The two we re old Dr. Castel and his wife, and they had 
been married for very many years. Mme Cast el had gone on a visit to a neighboring town 
some days before the epidemic started. They weren't one of those exemplary married couples of the Darby-and-Joan pattern; on the contrary, the na rrator has grounds for 
saying that, in all proba bility, neither partner felt quite sure the marriage was all that 
could have been desired. But this ruthless, pr otracted separation enabled them to realize 
that they could not live apart,  and in the sudden glow of this  discovery the risk of plague 
seemed insignificant.  That was an exception. For most people it  was obvious that the separation must 
last until the end of the epidemic. And for ev ery one of us the ruling emotion of his life, 
which he had imagined he knew through and through (the people of Oran, as has been said, have simple passions), took on a new as pect. Husbands who had had complete faith 
in their wives found, to their su rprise, that they were jeal ous; and lovers had the same 
experience. Men who had pictured themselves  as Don Juans became models of fidelity. 
Sons who had lived beside their mothers hardly giving them a glance fell to picturing with poignant regret each wrinkle in the ab sent face that memory cast upon the screen. 
This drastic, clean-cut depriva tion and our complete ignorance of what the future held in 
store had taken us unawares; we were unabl e to react against the mute appeal of 
presences, still so near and already so fa r, which haunted us daylong. In fact, our 
suffering was twofold; our own to start wit h, and then the imagined suffering of the 
absent one, son, mother, wife, or mistress.  Under other circumstances our townsfol k would probably have found an outlet in 
increased activity, a more sociable life. But th e plague forced inactivity on them, limiting 
their movements to the same dull round insi de the town, and throwing them, day after 
day, on the illusive solace of their memories . For in their aimless walks they kept on 
coming back to the same streets and usually, owing to the smallness of the town, these 
were streets in which, in happier days, they had walked with those who now were absent. 
 Thus the first thing that plague brought to our town was exile. And the narrator is 
convinced that he can set down here, as hol ding good for all, the feeling he personally 
had and to which many of his friends confe ssed. It was undoubtedly the feeling of exile, 
that sensation of a void within which never left  us, that irrational longing to hark back to 
the past or else to speed up the march of time,  and those keen shafts of memory that stung 
like fire. Sometimes we toyed with our imagination, composing ourselves to wait for a ring at the bell announcing somebody's return, or for the sound of a familiar footstep on the stairs; but, though we might  deliberately stay at home at  the hour when a traveler 
coming by the evening train would normally have arrived, and though we might contrive 
to forget for the moment that no trains we re running, that game of make-believe, for 
obvious reasons, could not last. Always a moment  came when we had to face the fact that no trains were coming in. And then we real ized that the separation was destined to 
continue, we had no choice but to come to terms with the days ahead. In short, we 
returned to our prison-house, we had nothing le ft us but the past, and even if some were 
tempted to live in the future, they had speedily to abandon the idea anyhow, as soon as 
could be, once they felt the wounds that th e imagination inflicts  on those who yield 
themselves to it.  It is noteworthy that our townspeople ve ry quickly desisted, even in public, from 
a habit one might have expected them to form , that of trying to figure out the probable 
duration of their exile. The reason was this: when the most pessimistic had fixed it at, 
say, six months; when they had drunk in advance the dregs of bitterness of those six black months, and painfully screwed up their co urage to the sticking-place, straining all 
their remaining energy to endure valiantly th e long ordeal of all those weeks and days, 
when they had done this, some friend they met, an article in a newspaper, a vague 
suspicion, or a flash of foresight would sugge st that, after all, there was no reason why 
the epidemic shouldn't last more than si x months; why not a year, or even more? 
 At such moments the collapse of their courage, willpower, and endurance was so 
abrupt that they felt they c ould never drag themselves out of the pit of despond into 
which they had fallen. Therefore they forced themselves never to think about the problematic day of escape, to cease looking to the future, and always to keep, so to speak, 
their eyes fixed on the ground at their feet. But, naturally enough, this prudence, this 
habit of feinting with their predicament a nd refusing to put up a fight, was ill rewarded. 
For, while averting that revulsion which they  found so unbearable, they also deprived 
themselves of those redeeming moments, frequent enough when all is told, when by 
conjuring up pictures of a re union to be, they could forget about the plague. Thus, in a 
middle course between these heights and dept hs, they drifted through life rather than 
lived, the prey of aimless days and sterile memories, like wandering shadows that could 
have acquired substance only by c onsenting to root themselves in the solid earth of their 
distress.  Thus, too, they came to know the incorrigi ble sorrow of all pr isoners and exiles, 
which is to live in company with a memory that serves no purpose. Even the past, of 
which they thought incessantly, had a savor onl y of regret. For they would have wished 
to add to it all that they re gretted having left undone, while they might yet have done it, 
with the man or woman whose return they now aw aited; just as in all the activities, even 
the relatively happy ones, of their life as pris oners they kept vainly  trying to include the 
absent one. And thus there was always some thing missing in their lives. Hostile to the 
past, impatient of the present, and cheated of  the future, we were much like those whom 
men's justice, or hatred, forces to live be hind prison bars. Thus the only way of escaping 
from that intolerable leisure was to set the trains running again in one's imagination and 
in filling the silence with th e fancied tinkle of a doorbell, in practice obstinately mute. 
 Still, if it was an exile, it was, for most of us, exile in one's own home. And 
though the narrator experienced only the common form of exile, he cannot forget the case 
of those who, like Rambert the journalist and a good many others, had to endure an 
aggravated deprivation, since,  being travelers caught by the plague and forced to stay 
where they were, they were cut off both from  the person with whom they wanted to be 
and from their homes as well. In the general exile they were the most exiled; since while 
time gave rise for them, as for us all, to th e suffering appropriate to it, there was also for them the space factor; they were obsessed by it and at every moment knocked their heads 
against the walls of this huge and alien lazar-house secluding them from their lost homes. 
These were the people, no doubt, whom one often saw wandering forlornly in the dusty 
town at all hours of the day, silently i nvoking nightfalls known to them alone and the 
daysprings of their happier land. And th ey fed their despondency with fleeting 
intimations, messages as disconcerting as a f light of swallows, a dew-fall at sundown, or 
those queer glints the sun sometimes dapples on empty streets. As for that outside world, 
which can always offer an escape from everythin g, they shut their eyes to it, bent as they 
were on cherishing the all-too-real phantoms of their imagination and conjuring up with 
all their might pictures of a land where a special play of light, two or three hills, a favorite 
tree, a woman's smile, composed for them  a world that nothing could replace. 
 To come at last, and more specifically, to the case of parted lovers, who present 
the greatest interest and of whom the narrato r is, perhaps, better qualified to speak, their 
minds were the prey of different emotions, notably remorse. For their present position 
enabled them to take stock of their feelings with a sort of  feverish objectivity. And, in 
these conditions, it was rare for them not to  detect their own shortcomings. What first 
brought these home to them was the trouble th ey experienced in summoning up any clear 
picture of what the absent one was doing. Th ey came to deplore their ignorance of the 
way in which that person used to spend his or her days, and reproached themselves for 
having troubled too little about th is in the past, and for having affected to think that, for a 
lover, the occupations of the loved one when they are not together could be a matter of 
indifference and not a source of joy. Once th is had been brought home to them, they 
could retrace the course of their love and see where it had fallen short. In normal times all 
of us know, whether consciously or not, that  there is no love which can't be bettered; 
nevertheless, we reconcile ourse lves more or less easily to the fact that ours has never 
risen above the average. But memory is less  disposed to compromise. And, in a very 
definite way, this misfortune which had come from outside and befallen a whole town did more than inflict on us an unmerited dist ress with which we might well be indignant. 
 It also incited us to create our own suffering and thus to accept frustration as a natural state. This was one of the tricks the pestilence had of diverting attention and 
confounding issues.  Thus each of us had to be content to live only for the day, alone under the vast indifference of the sky. This sense of being abandoned, which might in time have given characters a finer temper, began, however, by sapping them to the point of futility. For instance, some of our fellow citizens became s ubject to a curious kind of servitude, which 
put them at the mercy of the sun and the rain.  Looking at them, you had an impression that  for the first time in their lives they 
were becoming, as some would say, weather- conscious. A burst of sunshine was enough 
to make them seem delighted with the world, while rainy days gave a dark cast to their 
faces and their mood. A few weeks before, they ha d been free of this absurd subservience 
to the weather, because they had not to f ace life alone; the person they were living with 
held, to some extent, the foreground of th eir little world. But from now on it was 
different; they seemed at the mercy of the sky's caprices, in other words, suffered and 
hoped irrationally.  Moreover, in this extremity of solitude  none could count on any help from his 
neighbor; each had to bear the load of his troubles alone. If, by some chance, one of us tried to unburden himself or to say someth ing about his feelings, the reply he got, 
whatever it might be, usually wounded him. An d then it dawned on him that he and the 
man with him weren't talking about the same thing. For while he himself spoke from the 
depths of long days of brooding upon his person al distress, and the image he had tried to 
impart had been slowly shaped and proved in  the fires of passion and regret, this meant 
nothing to the man to whom he was speaki ng, who pictured a conventional emotion, a 
grief that is traded on the market-place, ma ss-produced. Whether friendly or hostile, the 
reply always missed fire, and the attempt to  communicate had to be given up. This was 
true of those at least for whom silence was unbearable, and since the others could not find 
the truly expressive word, they resigned themse lves to using the current coin of language, 
the commonplaces of plain narrative, of anecdot e, and of their daily paper. So in these 
cases, too, even the sincerest grief had to make do with the set phrases of ordinary 
conversation. Only on these terms could the prisoners of the plague ensure the sympathy of their concierge and the in terest of their hearers. 
 Nevertheless, and this point is most im portant, however bitter their distress and 
however heavy their hearts, for al l their emptiness, it can be truly said of these exiles that 
in the early period of the plague they could account themselves privileged. For at the precise moment when the residents of the town began to panic, their thoughts were 
wholly fixed on the person whom they longed to meet again. The egoism of love made 
them immune to the general distress and, if th ey thought of the plague, it was only in so 
far as it might threaten to make their separa tion eternal. Thus in the very heart of the 
epidemic they maintained a saving indifference, which one was tempted to take for composure.  Their despair saved them from panic, thus their misfortune had a good side. For 
instance, if it happened that one of them was carried off by the disease, it was almost always without his having had time to realize it. Snatched suddenly from his long, silent 
communion with a wraith of memory, he was plunged straightway into the densest 
silence of all. He'd had no time for anything.   WHILE our townspeople were trying to come to terms with their sudden isolation, the 
plague was posting sentries at the gates and turning away ships bound for Oran. No 
vehicle had entered the town since the gates were closed. From that day onwards one had 
the impression that all cars were moving in circles.  The harbor, too, presented a strange a ppearance to those who looked down on it 
from the top of the boulevards. The commercial  activity that hitherto made it one of the 
chief ports on the coast had ceased abruptly. Only a few ships, detained in quarantine, were anchored in the bay. But the gaunt, idle  cranes on the wharves, tip-carts lying on 
their sides, neglected heaps of sacks and barrels, all testified that commerce, too, had died of plague.  In spite of such unusual sights our townsfolk apparently found it hard to grasp 
what was happening to them. There were fee lings all could share, such as fear and 
separation, but personal interests, too, continued to occupy the foreground of their thoughts. Nobody as yet had really acknowledge d to himself what the disease connoted. 
Most people were chiefly aware of what ruffled  the normal tenor of their lives or affected 
their interests. They were worried and irrita ted, but these are not feelings with which to confront plague. Their first reaction, for instance, was to abuse the authorities. The 
Prefect's riposte to criticisms echoed by the press. Could not the regulations be modified 
and made less stringent? was somewhat unexpected. Hitherto neither the newspapers nor the Ransdoc Information Bureau had been gi ven any official sta tistics relating to the 
epidemic. Now the Prefect supplied them daily to the bureau, with th e request that they 
should be broadcast once a week.  In this, too, the reaction of  the public was slower than might have been expected. 
Thus the bare statement that three hundred and two deaths had taken place in the third 
week of plague failed to strike their imag ination. For one thing, a ll the three hundred and 
two deaths might not have been due to plague.  Also, no one in the town had any idea of the average weekly death-rate in 
ordinary times. The population of the town was about two hundred thousand. There was 
no knowing if the present death-rate were really so abnorma l. This is, in fact, the kind of 
statistics that nobody ever tr oubles much about, notwithstan ding that its interest is 
obvious. The public lacked, in short, standard s of comparison. It was only as time passed 
and the steady rise in the deat h-rate could not be ignored th at public opinion became alive 
to the truth. For in the fifth week there we re three hundred and tw enty-one deaths, and 
three hundred and forty-five in the sixth. Th ese figures, anyhow, spoke for themselves. 
Yet they were still not sensational enough to prevent our townsfolk, perturbed though 
they were, from persisting in the idea that what was happening was a sort of accident, disagreeable enough, but certain ly of a temporary order. 
 So they went on strolling about the town as usual and sitting at the tables on cafe 
terraces. Generally speaking, they did not l ack courage, bandied more jokes than 
lamentations, and made a show of accepting cheerfully unpleasantnesses that obviously 
could be only passing. In short, they kept up appearances. However, toward the end of 
the month, about the time of the Week of Pr ayer which will be described later on, there 
were more serious developments, altering the whole aspect of the town. To begin with, 
the Prefect took measures controlling th e traffic and the food-supply. Gasoline was 
rationed and restrictions were placed on the sale of foodstuffs. Reductions were ordered 
in the use of electricity.  Only necessaries were brought by road or air to Oran. Thus the traffic thinned out 
progressively until hardly any private cars were on the roads; luxury shops closed overnight, and others began to put up "Sol d Out" notices, while crowds of buyers stood 
waiting at their doors.  Oran assumed a novel appearance. You sa w more pedestrians, and in the slack 
hours numbers of people, reduced to idleness because shops and a good many offices were closed, crowded the streets and cafes. For the present they were not unemployed; 
merely on holiday. So it was that on fine days, toward three in the afternoon, Oran brought to mind a city where public rejoicings are in progress, shops are shut, and traffic 
is stopped to give a merry-making populace the freedom of the streets. 
 Naturally the picture-houses benefite d by the situation and made money hand 
over fist. They had one difficulty, however, to provide a change of program, since the 
circulation of films in the region had been  suspended. After a fortnight the various 
cinemas were obliged to exchange films and, af ter a further lapse of time, to show always 
the same program. In spite of this their takings did not fall off.  The cafes, thanks to the big stocks a ccumulated in a town where the wine-and-
liquor trade holds pride of place, were equally able to cater for their patrons. And, to tell 
the truth, there was much heavy drinking. One of the cafes had the brilliant idea of putting up a slogan: "The best  protection against infecti on is a bottle of good wine," 
which confirmed an already prevalent opini on that alcohol is a safeguard against 
infectious disease. Every night, toward tw o a.m., quite a number of drunken men, ejected 
from the cafes, staggered down the streets, vociferating optimism. 
 Yet all these changes were, in one sens e, so fantastic and had been made so 
precipitately that it wasn't easy to regard them  as likely to have any permanence. With the 
result that we went on focusing our attention on our personal feelings.  When leaving the hospital two days afte r the gates were cl osed, Dr. Rieux met 
Cottard in the street. The little man was b eaming with satisfacti on. Rieux congratulated 
him on his appearance.  "Yes," Cottard said, "I'm feeling very fit. Never was fitter in my life. But tell me, doctor. This blasted plague, what about it? Ge tting to look mighty serious, isn't it?" When 
the doctor nodded, he continued exuberantly:  "And there's no reason for it to stop now. 
This town's going to be in an unholy mess, by the look of things."  They walked a little way together. Cottard told the story of a grocer in his street 
who had laid by masses of canned provisions with  the idea of selling them later on at a 
big profit. When the ambulance men came to fetch him he had several dozen cans of 
meat under his bed.  "He died in the hospital. There's no mone y in plague, that's sure." Cottard was a 
mine of stories of this kind, true or false, about the epidemic. One of them was about a man with all the symptoms and running a high fever who dashed out into the street, flung 
himself on the first woman he met, and embraced her, yelling that he'd "got it."  "Good for him!" was Cottard's comment. But his next remark seemed to belie his 
gleeful exclamation. "Anyhow, we'll all be nut s before long, unless I'm much mistaken." 
 It was on the afternoon of the same day th at Grand at last unburdened himself to 
Rieux. Noticing Mme Rieux's photograph on th e desk, he looked at the doctor 
inquiringly. Rieux told him th at his wife was under treatme nt in a sanatorium some 
distance from the town. "In one way," Grand said , "that's lucky." The doctor agreed that it 
was lucky in a sense; but, he added, the great thing was that his wife should recover. 
 "Yes," Grand said, "I understand."  And then, for the first time since Rieux had made his acquaintance, he became quite voluble. Though he still had trouble over his words he succeeded nearly always in 
finding them; indeed, it was as if for years he'd been thinking over what he now said. 
 When in his teens, he had married a very young girl, one of a poor family living 
near by. It was, in fact, in order to marry th at he'd abandoned his studies and taken up his 
present job. Neither he nor Jeanne  ever stirred from their part of the town. In his courting 
days he used to go to see her at her home, a nd the family were inclined to make fun of 
her bashful, silent admirer. Her father was a railroadman. When off duty, he spent most of the time seated in a corner beside the window gazing meditatively at the passers-by, 
his enormous hands splayed out on his thighs . His wife was always busy with domestic 
duties, in which Jeanne gave her a hand. Jea nne was so tiny that it always made Grand 
nervous to see her crossing a street, the vehi cles bearing down on her looked so gigantic. 
Then one day shortly before Christmas they  went out for a short walk together and stopped to admire a gaily decorated shop-window. After gazing ecstatically at it for some 
moments, Jeanne turned to him. "Oh, isn't it lovely!" He squeezed her wrist. It was thus 
that the marriage had come about. 
 The rest of the story, to Grand's thi nking, was very simple. The common lot of 
married couples. You get married, you go on loving a bit longer, you work. And you 
work so hard that it makes you forget to love . As the head of the office where Grand was 
employed hadn't kept his promise, Jeanne, too, ha d to work outside. At this point a little 
imagination was needed to grasp what Gr and was trying to convey. Owing largely to 
fatigue, he gradually lost grip of himself, had less and less to  say, and failed to keep alive 
the feeling in his wife that she was love d. An overworked husband, poverty, the gradual 
loss of hope in a better future, silent evenings at home, what chance had any passion of surviving such conditions? Probably Jeanne ha d suffered. And yet she'd stayed; of course 
one may often suffer a long time without knowing it. Thus years went by. Then, one day, she left him. Naturally she hadn't gone alone . "I was very fond of you, but now I'm so 
tired. I'm not happy to go, but one needn't be happy to make another start." That, more or less, was what she'd said in her letter.  Grand, too, had suffered. And he, too, might , as Rieux pointed out, have made a 
fresh start. But no, he had lost faith. Only, he couldn't stop thinking about her. What he'd 
have liked to do was to write her a letter justifying himself. 
 "But it's not easy," he told Rieux. "I've been thinking it over for years. While we 
loved each other we didn't need words to make ourselves understood. But people don't love forever. A time came when I should have  found the words to keep her with me, only 
I couldn't." Grand produced from his pocket something that looked like a check duster 
and blew his nose noisily. Then he wiped his mustache. Rieux gazed at him in silence. "Forgive me, doctor," Grand added hastily, "but how shall I put it? I feel you're to be trusted. That's why I can talk to you about these things. And the n, you see, I get all 
worked up."  Obviously Grand's thoughts were leagues away from the plague. 
 That evening Rieux sent a telegram to  his wife telling her that the town was 
closed, that she must go on taki ng great care of herself, and that she was in his thoughts. 
 One evening when he was leaving the hosp ital, it was about three weeks after the 
closing of the gates, Rieux found a young man waiting for him in the street.  "You remember me, don't you?"  Rieux believed he did, but couldn't quite place him.  "I called on you just before this tr ouble started," the young man said, "for 
information about the living-conditions in  the Arab quarter. My name is Raymond 
Rambert."  "Ah yes, of course. Well, you've now th e makings of a good story for your paper." 
 Rambert, who gave the impression of be ing much less self-assured than he had 
seemed on the first occasion when they met,  said it wasn't that he'd come about. 
 He wanted to know if the doctor would kindly give him some help. 
 "I must apologize," he continued, "but really I don't know a soul here, and the 
local representative of my  paper is a complete dud." 
 Rieux said he had to go to a dispensary in the center of th e town and suggested 
they should walk there together. Their way lay through the narrow st reets of the Negro 
district. Evening was coming on, but the town, once so noisy at this hour, was strangely still. The only sounds were some bugle-calls echoing through the air, still golden with the 
end of daylight; the army, anyhow, was ma king a show of carrying on as usual. 
Meanwhile, as they walked down the steep little streets flanke d by blue, mauve, and 
saffron-yellow walls, Rambert talked incessant ly, as if his nerves were out of hand. 
 He had left his wife in Paris, he said. Well, she wasn't actually his wife, but it 
came to the same thing. The moment the town was put into quarantine he had sent her a 
wire. His impression then was that this state of things was quite temporary, and all he'd 
tried to do was to get a letter through to her. But the post-office officials had vetoed this, 
his colleagues of the local press said they could do nothing for him, and a clerk in the 
Prefect's office had laughed in his face. It was only after waiting in line for a couple of hours that he had managed to get a telegram  accepted: All goes well. Hope to see you 
soon.  But next morning, when he woke up, it ha d dawned on him that, after all, there 
was absolutely no knowing how long this business was going to last. So he'd decided to leave the town at once. Being able, thanks to his professional status, to pull some strings, 
he had secured an interview with a high official in the Prefect's office. He had explained that his presence in Oran was purely accidental, he had no connection with the town and no reasons for staying in it; that being so, he surely was entitled to leave, even if, once 
outside the town, he had to undergo a spell of quarantine. The official told him he quite 
appreciated his position, but no exceptions could be made. He would, however, see if 
anything could be done, though he could hold ou t little hope of a quick decision, as the 
authorities were taking a very se rious view of the situation. 
 "But, confound it," Rambert exclaimed, "I don't belong here!"  "Quite so. Anyhow, let's hope the epidemic will soon be over." Finally, he had tried to console Rambert by pointing out that, as  a journalist, he had an excellent subject 
to his hand in Oran; indeed, when one came to think of it, no event, however disagreeable 
in some ways, but had its bright side. Whereat Rambert had shrugged his shoulders petulantly and walked out.  They had come to the center of the town.  "It's so damn silly, doctor, isn't it? The truth is I wasn't brought into the world to 
write newspaper articles. But it's quite likely I was brought into the world to live with a 
woman. That's reasonable enough, isn't it?"  Rieux replied cautiously that there mi ght be something in what he said. 
 The central boulevards were not so crow ded as usual. The few people about were 
hurrying to distant homes. Not a smile was to  be seen on any face. Rieux guessed that 
this was a result of the la test Ransdoc announcement. After twenty-four hours our 
townspeople would begin to hope again. But on the days when they were announced, the statistics were too fresh in everybody's memory.  "The truth," Rambert remarked abruptly, "is that she and I have been together 
only a short time, and we suit each other pe rfectly." When Rieux said nothing, he 
continued: "I can see I'm boring you. Sorr y. All I wanted to know was whether you 
couldn't possibly give me a certificate stating th at I haven't got this damned disease. It 
might make things easier, I think."  Rieux nodded. A small boy had just run agai nst his legs and fallen; he set him on 
his feet again. Walking on, they came to th e Place d'Armes. Gray with dust, the palms 
and fig trees drooped despondently around a stat ue of the Republic, which too was coated with grime and dust. They stopped beside the statue. Rieux stamped his feet on the 
flagstones to shake off the coat of white dus t that had gathered on them. His hat pushed 
slightly back, his shirt-colla r gaping under a loosely knotted tie, his cheeks ill-shaven, the 
journalist had the sulky, stubborn look of a young man who feels himself deeply injured.  "Please don't doubt I understand you," Rieux said, "but you must see your 
argument doesn't hold water. I can't give  you that certificate because I don't know 
whether you have the disease or not, and even  if I did, how could I certify that between 
the moment of leaving my consulting-room and your arrival at the Prefect's office you 
wouldn't be infected? And even if I did?"  "And even if you did?"  "Even if I gave you a certificate, it wouldn't help."  "Why not?"  "Because there are thousands of people pl aced as you are in this town, and there 
can't be any question of allowing them to leave it."  "Even supposing they haven't got plague?"  "That's not a sufficient reason. Oh, I know it's an absurd situation, but we're all involved in it, and we've got to accept it as it is."  "But I don't belong here."  "Unfortunately, from now on you'll belong here, like everybody else." 
 Rambert raised his voice a little.  "But, damn it, doctor, can't you see it's a matter of common human feeling? Or don't you realize what this sort of separa tion means to people who are fond of each 
other?"  Rieux was silent for a moment, then sa id he understood it perfectly. He wished 
nothing better than that Rambert should be allo wed to return to his wife and that all who 
loved one another and were parted should come  together again. Only the law was the law, 
plague had broken out, and he coul d only do what had to be done. 
 "No," Rambert said bitterly, "you can't understand. You're using the language of 
reason, not of the heart; you live in a world of abstractions." 
 The doctor glanced up at the statue of th e Republic, then said he did not know if 
he was using the language of reason, but he knew he was using the language of the facts 
as everybody could see them, which wasn't necessarily the same thing.  The journalist tugged at his tie to straighten it.  "So, I take it, I can't count on help from you. Very good. But" his tone was challenging "leave this town I shall."  The doctor repeated that he quite understood, but all that  was none of his 
business.  "Excuse me, but it is your business." Rambert raised his voice again. "I 
approached you because I'd been told you play ed a large part in drawing up the orders 
that have been issued. So I thought that in one case anyhow you could unmake what 
you'd helped to make. But you don't care; you never gave a thought to anybody, you didn't take the case of people w ho are separated into account." 
 Rieux admitted this was true up to a poin t; he'd preferred not to take such cases 
into account.  "Ah, I see now!" Rambert exclaimed. "You' ll soon be talking about the interests 
of the general public. But public welfare is merely the sum total of the private welfares of 
each of us."  The doctor seemed abruptly to come out of a dream.  "Oh, come!" he said. "There's that, but ther e's much more to it than that. It doesn't 
do to rush to conclusions, you know. But you've  no reason to feel angered. I assure you 
that if you find a way out of your quandary, I shall be extremely pleased. Only, there are 
things that my official pos ition debars me from doing." 
 Rambert tossed his head petulantly.  "Yes, yes, I was wrong to show annoyance. And I've taken up too much of your time already."  Rieux asked him to let him know how he got on with his project, and not to bear 
him a grudge for not having been more amenab le. He was sure, he added, that there was 
some common ground on which they coul d meet. Rambert looked perplexed. 
 Then, "Yes," he said after a short silence, "I rather think so, too, in spite of 
myself, and of all you've just been saying." He paused. "Still, I can't agree with you." 
 Pulling down his hat over his eyes, he walked quickly away. Rieux saw him enter the hotel where Tarrou was staying.  After a moment the doctor gave a slight  nod, as if approving of some thought that 
had crossed his mind. Yes, the journalist was right in refusing to be balked of happiness. But was he right in reproaching him, Rieux, w ith living in a world of  abstractions? Could 
that term "abstraction" really apply to these days he spent in his hos pital while the plague 
was battening on the town, raising its death-toll to five hundred victims a week? Yes, an element of abstraction, of a divorce from rea lity, entered into such calamities. Still when 
abstraction sets to killing you, you've got to get busy with it. And so much Rieux knew: that this wasn't the easiest course. Running th is auxiliary hospital, for instance, of which 
he was in charge' there were now thr ee such hospitals, was no light task. 
 He had had an anteroom, leading into his surgery, installed, equipped for dealing with patients on arrival. The floor had been excavated and replaced by a shallow lake of 
water and cresylic acid, in the center of which was a sort of  island made of bricks. The 
patient was carried to the island, rapidly undressed, and hi s clothes dropped into the 
disinfectant water. After bei ng washed, dried, and dressed in  one of the coarse hospital 
nightshirts, he was taken to Rieux for examination, then carried to one of the wards. This hospital, a requisitioned schoolhouse, now cont ained five hundred beds, almost all of 
which were occupied.  After the reception of the patients, which he personally supervised, Rieux injected 
serum, lanced buboes, checked the statis tics again, and return ed for his afternoon 
consultations. Only when night was setting in did he start on his round of visits, and he 
never got home till a very late hour. On the previous night his mother, when handing him 
a telegram from his wife, had remarked that his hands were shaking.  "Yes," he said. "But it's only a matter of  sticking to it, and my  nerves will steady 
down, you'll see."  He had a robust constitution and, as yet, wa sn't really tired. Still his visits, for one 
thing, were beginning to put a great strain on his endurance. Once the epidemic was 
diagnosed, the patient had to be evacuated forthwith. Then indeed began "abstraction" 
and a tussle with the family, who knew they  would not see the sick man again until he was dead or cured. "Have some pity, docto r!" It was Mme Loret, mother of the 
chambermaid at Tarrou's hotel, who made the appeal. An unnecessary appeal; of course 
he had pity. But what purpose could it se rve? He had to telephone, and soon the 
ambulance could be heard clanging down the st reet. (At first the neighbors used to open 
windows and watch. Later they promptly s hut them.) Then came a second phase of 
conflict, tears and pleadings, abstraction, in a word. In those fever-hot, nerve-ridden 
sickrooms crazy scenes took place.  But the issue was always the same. Th e patient was removed. Then Rieux, too, 
could leave.  In the early days he had merely telephoned, then rushed off to see other patients, without waiting for the ambulance. But no sooner was he gone than the family locked and barred their doors, preferring co ntact with the plague to a parting whose issue they now 
knew only too well. There followed objurgati ons, screams, batterings on the door, action 
by the police, and later armed force; the patien t was taken by storm. Thus during the first 
few weeks Rieux was compelled to stay with the patient till the ambulance came. Later, when each doctor was accompanied by a volunteer police officer, Rieux could hurry away to the next patient. But, to begin wit h, every evening was like that evening when he 
was called in for Mme Loret's daughter. He was shown into a small apartment decorated with fans and artificial flowers. The mother greeted him with a faltering smile. 
 "Oh, I do hope it's not the fever everyone's talking about."  Lifting the coverlet and chemise, he gazed  in silence at the red blotches on the 
girl's thighs and stomach, the swollen ganglia . After one glance the mother broke into 
shrill, uncontrollable cries of  grief. And every evening mothers wailed thus, with a 
distraught abstraction, as their eyes fell on those fatal stigmata on limbs and bellies; every evening hands gripped Rieux's arms, there wa s a rush of useless words, promises, and 
tears; every evening the nearing tocsin of  the ambulance provoked scenes as vain as 
every form of grief. Rieux had nothing to look forward to but a long sequence of such 
scenes, renewed again and again. Yes, pla gue, like abstraction, was monotonous; perhaps 
only one factor changed, and that was Rieux himself. Standing at  the foot of the statue of 
the Republic that evening, he felt it; all he was conscious of was a bleak indifference 
steadily gaining on him as he gazed at the door of the hotel Rambert had just entered.  After these wearing weeks, after all t hose nightfalls when the townsfolk poured 
into the streets to roam them aimlessly, Rieux had learned that he need no longer steel himself against pity. One grows out of pity when  it's useless. And in this feeling that his 
heart had slowly closed in on itself, the doctor found a solace, his only solace, for the almost unendurable burden of his days. This, he knew, would make his task easier, and 
therefore he was glad of it. When he came home at two in the mo rning and his mother 
was shocked at the blank look he gave he r, she was deploring precisely the sole 
alleviation Rieux could then experience. To fight abstraction you must have something of 
it in your own make-up.  But how could Rambert be expected to grasp that? Abstrac tion for him was all 
that stood in the way of his happiness. Ind eed, Rieux had to admit the journalist was 
right, in one sense. But he knew, too, that abstraction sometimes  proves itself stronger 
than happiness; and then, if only then, it has to be taken into account. And this was what 
was going to happen to Rambert, as the doctor was to learn when, much later, Rambert told him more about himself. Thus he was en abled to follow, and on a different plane, the dreary struggle in progress between each ma n's happiness and the abstractions of the 
plague, which constituted th e whole life of our town over a long period of time. 
 
 BUT where some saw abstraction others saw the truth. The first month of the plague 
ended gloomily, with a violent recrudescence of the epidemic and a dramatic sermon 
preached by Father Paneloux, the Jesuit priest who had given an arm to old Michel when 
he was tottering home at the start of his illn ess. Father Paneloux had already made his 
mark with frequent contributions to the Or an Geographical Society; these dealt chiefly 
with ancient inscriptions, on which he was an authority. But he had also reached a wider, non-specialist public with a series of lectures  on present-day individualism. In these he 
had shown himself a stalwart champion of Ch ristian doctrine at its most precise and 
purest, equally remote from modern laxity and the obscurantism of the past. On these occasions he had not shrunk from trouncing his hearers with some vigorous home-truths.  Hence his local celebrity.  Toward the end of the month the ecclesias tical authorities in our town resolved to 
do battle against the plague w ith the weapons appropriate to  them, and organized a Week 
of Prayer. These manifestations of public piety were to be concluded on Sunday by a 
High Mass celebrated under the auspices of St. Roch, the plague-stricken saint, and 
Father Paneloux was asked to preach the se rmon. For a fortnight he desisted from the 
research work on St. Augustine and the African  Church that had won for him a high place 
in his Order. A man of a pa ssionate, fiery temperament, he flung himself wholeheartedly 
into the task assigned him. The sermon was a topic of conversation long before it was 
delivered and, in its way, it marks an impor tant date in the history of the period. 
 There were large attendances at the servic es of the Week of Prayer. It must not, 
however, be assumed that in normal times the townsfolk of Oran are particularly devout. 
On Sunday mornings, for instance, sea-bath ing competes seriously with churchgoing. 
Nor must it be thought that they had seen a great light and had a sudden change of heart. But, for one thing, now that the town was cl osed and the harbor out of bounds, there was 
no question of bathing; moreover, they were  in a quite exceptional frame of mind and, 
though in their heart of hearts they were far from recognizing the enormity of what had 
come on them, they couldn't help feeling, for obvious reasons, that decidedly something had changed.  Nevertheless, many continued hoping that  the epidemic would soon die out and 
they and their families be spared. Thus they felt under no obligation to make any change in their habits as yet. Plague was for them  an unwelcome visitant , bound to take its leave 
one day as unexpectedly as it had come. Alar med, but far from desperate, they hadn't yet 
reached the phase when plague would seem to  them the very tissue of their existence; 
when they forgot the lives that until now it ha d been given them to lead. In short, they 
were waiting for the turn of events.  With regard to religion, as to many othe r problems, plague had induced in them a 
curious frame of mind, as remote from indiffere nce as from fervor; the best name to give 
it, perhaps, might be "objectivity." Most of those who took part in the Week of Prayer 
would have echoed a remark made by one of the churchgoers in Dr. Rieux's hearing: 
"Anyhow, it can't do any harm." Even Tarrou, afte r recording in his not ebook that in such 
cases the Chinese fall to playing tambourines before the Genius of Plague, observed that there was no means of telling whether, in pr actice, tambourines proved more efficacious 
than prophylactic measures. He merely added that, to decide the point, we should need 
first to ascertain if a Genius  of Plague actually existed, and our ignorance on this point 
nullified any opinions we might form. 
 In any case the Cathedral was practically  always full of worshippers throughout 
the Week of Prayer. For the first two or th ree days many stayed outside, under the palms 
and pomegranate trees in the garden in front of the porch, and listened from a distance to 
the swelling tide of prayers and invocati ons whose backwash filled the neighboring 
streets. But once an example had been given, they began to enter the Cathedral and join 
timidly in the responses. And on the Sunday of  the sermon a huge congregation filled the 
nave, overflowing on to the steps and precinc ts. The sky had clouded up on the previous 
day, and now it was raining heavily. Those in the open unfurled umbre llas. The air inside 
the Cathedral was heavy with fumes of incense  and the smell of wet clothes when Father 
Paneloux stepped into the pulpit.  He was a stockily built man, of medium height. When he leaned on the edge of the pulpit, grasping the woodw ork with his big hands, all one saw was a black, massive 
torso and, above it, two rosy cheeks overhung by steel-rimmed spectacles. He had a 
powerful, rather emotional delivery, which carried to a great distance, and when he 
launched at the congregation his opening phras e in clear, emphatic tones: "Calamity has 
come on you, my brethren, and, my brethren, you deserved it " there was a flutter that 
extended to the crowd massed in  the rain outside the porch. 
 In strict logic what came next did not seem to follow from this dramatic opening. Only as the sermon proceeded did it become  apparent to the congregation that, by a 
skillful oratorical device, Father Paneloux had launched at them, like a fisticuff, the gist 
of his whole discourse. After launching it he went on at once to quot e a text from Exodus 
relating to the plague  of Egypt, and said: 
 "The first time this scourge appears in history, it was wielded to strike down the 
enemies of God. Pharaoh set himself up against the divine will, and the plague beat him 
to his knees. Thus from the dawn of recorded  history the scourge of God has humbled the 
proud of heart and laid low those who hardened themselves against Him. Ponder this well, my friends, and fall on your knees."  The downpour had increased in violence,  and these words, striking through a 
silence intensified by the dr umming of raindrops on the chancel windows, carried such 
conviction that, after a moment ary hesitation, some of the worshippers slipped forward 
from their seats on to their knees. Others fe lt it right to follow their example, and the 
movement gradually spread until presently everyone was kneeling, from end to end of the cathedral. No sound, except an occasional creak of chairs, accompanied the movement. Then Paneloux drew himself up to his full he ight, took a deep breat h, and continued his 
sermon in a voice that gathered strength as it proceeded.  "If today the plague is in your midst, th at is because the hour has struck for taking 
thought. The just man need have no fear, but the evildoer has good cause to tremble. For 
plague is the flail of God and the world His threshing-floor, and implacably He will thresh out His harvest until the wheat is separated from the chaff. There will be more chaff than wheat, few chosen of the many called.  Yet this calamity was not willed by God. Too long this world of ours has 
connived at evil, too long has it counted on the divine mercy, on God's forgiveness. Repentance was enough, men thought; nothing was forbidden. Everyone felt comfortably 
assured; when the day came, he would surely turn from his sins and repent. Pending that day, the easiest course was to surrender al l along the line; divine compassion would do 
the rest. For a long while God gazed down on this  town with eyes of compassion; but He 
grew weary of waiting, His et ernal hope was too long deferred, and now He has turned 
His face away from us. And so, God's light withdrawn, we walk in darkness, in the thick darkness of this plague."  Someone in the congregation gave a little  snort, like that of a restive horse. 
 After a short silence the preach er continued in a lower tone. 
 "We read in the Golden Legend that in  the time of King Umberto Italy was swept 
by plague and its greatest ravages took place in  Rome and Pavia. So dreadful were these 
that the living hardly sufficed to bury th e dead. And a good angel was made visible to 
human eyes, giving his orders to an evil angel who bore a great hunting-spear, and 
bidding him strike the houses; and as many st rokes as he dealt a house, so many dead 
were carried out of it."  Here Paneloux stretched forth his two s hort arms toward the open porch, as if 
pointing to something behind the tumbling curtain of the rain. 
 "My brothers," he cried, "that fatal hunt is up, and harrying our streets today.  See him there, that angel of the pestilen ce, comely as Lucifer, shining like Evil's 
very self! He is hovering above your roofs with  his great spear in his right hand, poised to 
strike, while his left hand is stretched toward one or other of your  houses. Maybe at this 
very moment his finger is pointing to your door, the red spear crashing on its panels, and 
even now the plague is entering your home and settling down in your bedroom to await 
your return. Patient and watchful , ineluctable as the order of the scheme of things, it bides 
its time. No earthly power, nay, not even, ma rk me well, the vaunted might of human 
science can avail you to avert that hand on ce it is stretched to ward you. And winnowed 
like corn on the blood-stained threshing-floor of suffering, you will be cast away with the chaff."  At this point the Father reverted with heightened eloquence to  the symbol of the 
flail. He bade his hearers pi cture a huge wooden bar whirli ng above the town, striking at 
random, swinging up again in a shower of drops of blood, and spreading carnage and 
suffering on earth, "for the seedtime that shall prepare the harvest of the truth." 
 At the end of his long phrase Father Pa neloux paused; his hair was straggling over 
his forehead, his body shaken by tremors that his hands communicated to the pulpit. When he spoke again, his voice was lower, but vibrant with accusation. 
 "Yes, the hour has come for serious thought. You fondly imagined it was enough 
to visit God on Sundays, and thus you coul d make free of your weekdays. You believed 
some brief formalities, some bendings of the knee, would recompense Him well enough 
for your criminal indifference. But God is not mocked. These brief encounters could not 
sate the fierce hunger of His love. He wished  to see you longer and more often; that is 
His manner of loving and, indeed, it is th e only manner of loving. And this is why, 
wearied of waiting for you to come to Him, He  loosed on you this visitation; as He has 
visited all the cities that offended against Him since the dawn of history. Now you are 
learning your lesson, the lesson th at was learned by Cain and his offspring, by the people 
of Sodom and Gomorrah, by Job and Pharaoh, by all that hardened their hearts against 
Him. And like them you have been beholdi ng mankind and all creation with new eyes, since the gates of this city closed on you and on the pestilence. Now, at last, you know 
the hour has struck to bend your thou ghts to first and last things." 
 A wet wind was sweeping up the nave , making the candle-flames bend and 
flicker. 
 The pungency of burning wax, coughs, a s tifled sneeze, rose toward Father 
Paneloux, who, reverting to his exordium with  a subtlety that was much appreciated, 
went on in a calm, almost matter-of-fact  voice: "Many of you are wondering, I know, 
what I am leading up to. I wish to lead you to the truth and teach you to rejoice, yes, 
rejoice, in spite of all th at I have been telling you. 
 For the time is past when a helping hand or mere words of good advice could set 
you on the right path. Today the truth is a comm and. It is a red spear sternly pointing to 
the narrow path, the one way of salvation. And th us, my brothers, at last  it is revealed to 
you, the divine compassion which has ordained  good and evil in everything; wrath and 
pity; the plague and your salv ation. This same pestilence wh ich is slaying you works for 
your good and points your path.  "Many centuries ago the Christians of Abyssinia saw in the plague a sure and 
God-sent means of winning eternal life. Thos e who were not yet st ricken wrapped round 
them sheets in which men had died of plague, so as to make sure of their death. I grant 
you such a frenzied quest of salv ation was not to be commended. 
 It shows an overhaste, indeed, a presum ptuousness, which we can but deplore. No 
man should seek to force God's hand or to  hurry on the appointed hour, and from a 
practice that aims at speeding up the order of  events which God has ordained unalterably 
from all time, it is but a step to heresy. Yet we can learn a salutary lesson from the zeal, 
excessive though it was, of those Abyssinian Ch ristians. Much of it is alien to our more 
enlightened spirits, and yet it gives us a glim pse of that radiant eternal light which glows, 
a small still flame, in the dark core of huma n suffering. And this light, too, illuminates the 
shadowed paths that lead towards deliveran ce. It reveals the w ill of God in action, 
unfailingly transforming evil in to good. And once again today it is leading us through the 
dark valley of fears and groans towards the ho ly silence, the wellspring of all life. This, 
my friends, is the vast consolation I would hold out to you, so that when you leave this 
house of God you will carry away with you not only words of wrath, but a message, too, 
of comfort for your hearts."  Everyone supposed that the sermon had e nded. Outside, the rain had ceased and 
watery sunshine was yellowing the Cathedra l square. Vague sounds of voices came from 
the streets, and a low hum of traffic,  the speech of an awakening town. 
 Discreetly, with a subdued rustling, the congregation gathered together their 
belongings. However, the Father had a few more  words to say. He told them that after 
having made it clear that this plague came from God for the punishment of their sins, he would not have recourse, in concluding, to an eloquence that, considering the tragic 
nature of the occasion, would be out of keep ing. He hoped and believed that all of them 
now saw their position in its true light. But, before leaving th e pulpit, he would like to tell 
them of something he had been reading in  an old chronicle of the Black Death at 
Marseille. In it Mathieu Marais, the chronicler , laments his lot; he says he has been cast 
into hell to languish without succor and wit hout hope. Well, Mathieu Marais was blind! 
Never more intensely than today had he, Fath er Paneloux, felt the immanence of divine 
succor and Christian hope granted to all alik e. He hoped against hope that, despite all the horrors of these dark days, despite the gr oans of men and wome n in agony, our fellow 
citizens would offer up to heaven that one pr ayer which is truly Ch ristian, a prayer of 
love. And God would see to the rest. 
  IT is hard to say if this sermon had any effect on our townsfolk. M. Othon, the 
magistrate, assured Dr. Rieux that he ha d found the preacher's arguments "absolutely 
irrefutable." But not everyone took so unqualif ied a view. To some the sermon simply 
brought home the fact that they had been sentenced, for an unknown crime, to an indeterminate period of punishment. And while a good many people adapted themselves 
to confinement and carried on their humdrum lives as before, there were others who 
rebelled and whose one idea now was to  break loose from the prison-house. 
 At first the fact of being cut off from the outside world was accepted with a more 
or less good grace, much as people would have put up with any other temporary 
inconvenience that interfered with only a few of their habits. But, now they had abruptly 
become aware that they were undergoing a so rt of incarceration under that blue dome of 
sky, already beginning to sizzle in the fires of summer, they  had a vague sensation that 
their whole lives were threaten ed by the present turn of even ts, and in the evening, when 
the cooler air revived their energy, this feeli ng of being locked in like criminals prompted 
them sometimes to foolhardy acts.  It is noteworthy, this may or may not have been due to mere coincidence, that this Sunday of the sermon marked the beginning of something like a widespread panic in the 
town, and it took so deep a hold as to lead one to suspect that only now had the true 
nature of their situation dawned on our townspeople. Seen from this angle, the atmosphere of the town was somewhat changed. But, actually, it was a problem whether the change was in the atmosphere or in their hearts. 
 A few days after the sermon, when Ri eux, on his way to one of the outlying 
districts of the town, was discussing the cha nge with Grand, he collided in the darkness 
with a man who was standing in the middle of the pavement swaying from side to side 
without trying to advance. At the same mome nt the street-lamps, which were being lit 
later and later in the evening, went on s uddenly, and a lamp just behind Rieux and his 
companion threw its light full on the man's face. 
 His eyes were shut and he was laug hing soundlessly. Big drops of sweat were 
rolling down the face convulsed with silent merriment.  "A lunatic at larg e," Grand observed. 
 Rieux took his arm and was shepherding him on when he noticed that Grand was trembling violently.  "If things go on as they are going," Rie ux remarked, "the whole town will be a 
madhouse." He felt exhausted, his throat was parched. "Let's have a drink." 
 They turned into a small cafe. The only light came from a lamp over the bar, the 
heavy air had a curious reddish tinge, and for no apparent reason everyone was speaking 
in undertones.  To the doctor's surprise Grand asked for a small glass of straight liquor, which he 
drank off at a gulp. "Fiery stuff!" he observe d; then, a moment later, suggested making a 
move.  Out in the street it seemed to Rieux that the night was full of whispers.  Somewhere in the black depths above the street-lamps there was a low soughing 
that brought to his mind that unseen flail thre shing incessantly the languid air of which 
Paneloux had spoken. 
 "Happily, happily," Grand muttered, then paused.  Rieux asked him what he had been going to say.  "Happily, I've my work."  "Ah yes," Rieux said. "That's something, anyhow." Then, so as not to hear that eerie whistling in the air, he asked Grand if he was getting good results. 
 "Well, yes, I think I'm making headway."  "Have you much more to do?"  Grand began to show an animation unlike his usual self, and his voice took ardor 
from the liquor he had drunk.  "I don't know. But that's not the point, doc tor; yes, I can assure you that's not the 
point."  It was too dark to see clearly, but Ri eux had the impression that he was waving 
his arms. He seemed to be working himself up to say something, and when he spoke, the words came with a rush.  "What I really want, doctor,  is this. On the day when the manuscript reaches the 
publisher, I want him to stand up? after he's  read it through, of course, and say to his 
staff: 'Gentlemen, hats off!'"  Rieux was dumbfounded, and, to add to his amazement, he saw, or seemed to see, the man beside him making as if to take off his hat with a sweeping gesture, bringing his 
hand to his head, then holding his arm out stra ight in front of him. That queer whistling 
overhead seemed to gather force.  "So you see," Grand added, "it's got to be flawless."  Though he knew little of the literary wo rld, Rieux had a susp icion that things 
didn't happen in it quite so picturesquely, that , for instance, publishe rs do not keep their 
hats on in their offices. But, of course, one never can tell, and Rieux preferred to hold his 
peace. Try as he might to shut his ears to it, he still was listening to that eerie sound above, the whispering of the plague.  They had reached the part of the town where Grand lived and, as it was on a slight eminence, they felt the cool night breeze fanning their cheeks and at the same time 
carrying away from them the noises of the town.  Grand went on talking, but Rieux failed to follow all the worthy man was saying. 
 All he gathered was that the work he was engaged on ran to a great many pages, 
and he was at almost excruciating pains to br ing it to perfection. "Evenings, whole weeks, 
spent on one word, just think! Sometimes on a mere conjunction!"  Grand stopped abruptly and seized the doctor by a button of his coat. The words 
came stumbling out of his almost toothless mouth.  "I'd like you to understand, doctor. I gr ant you it's easy enough to choose between 
a 'but' and an 'and.' It's a bit more difficu lt to decide between 'and' and 'then.' But 
definitely the hardest thing may be to know whether one should put an 'and' or leave it out."  "Yes," Rieux said, "I see your point."  He started walking again. Grand looked  abashed, then stepped forward and drew 
level.  "Sorry," he said awkwardly. "I don't know  what's come over me this evening." 
 Rieux patted his shoulder encouragingly, saying he'd been much interested in 
what Grand had said and would like to help him. This seemed to reassure Grand, and 
when they reached his place he suggested, af ter some slight hesitation, that the doctor 
should come in for a moment. Rieux agreed.  They entered the dining-room and Grand gave him a chair beside a table strewn 
with sheets of paper cove red with writing in a microscopic hand, criscrossed with 
corrections.  "Yes, that's it," he said in answer to  the doctor's questioning glance. "But won't 
you drink something? I've some wine."  Rieux declined. He was bending over the manuscript.  "No, don't look," Grand said. "It's my ope ning phrase, and it's giving trouble, no 
end of trouble."  He too was gazing at the sheets of pa per on the table, and his hand seemed 
irresistibly drawn to one of them. Finally he picked it up and held it to the shadeless 
electric bulb so that the light shone through. The paper shook in his hand and Rieux 
noticed that his forehead was moist with sweat.  "Sit down," he said, "and read it to me."  "Yes." There was a timid gratitude in Gr and's eyes and smile. "I think I'd like you 
to hear it."  He waited for a while, still gazing at th e writing, then sat down. Meanwhile Rieux 
was listening to the curious buzzing sound that wa s rising from the streets as if in answer 
to the soughings of the plague. At that mome nt he had a preternaturally vivid awareness 
of the town stretched out below, a victim wo rld secluded and apart, and of the groans of 
agony stifled in its darkness. Then, pitched low but clear, Grand's voice came to his ears. 
 "One fine morning in the month of  May an elegant young horsewoman might 
have been seen riding a handsome sorrel mare along the flowery avenues of the Bois de 
Boulogne."  Silence returned, and with  it the vague murmur of th e prostrate town. Grand had 
put down the sheet and was still stari ng at it. After a while he looked up. 
 "What do you think of it?"  Rieux replied that this opening phrase ha d whetted his curiosity; he'd like to hear 
what followed. Whereat Grand told him he'd  got it all wrong. He seemed excited and 
slapped the papers on the tabl e with the flat of his hand. 
 "That's only a rough draft. Once I've su cceeded in rendering perfectly the picture 
in my mind's eye, once my words have the ex act tempo of this ride, the horse is trotting, 
one-two-three, one-two-three, see what I m ean? the rest will come more easily and, 
what's even more important, the illusion will be  such that from the very first words it will 
be possible to say: 'Hats off!'.  But before that, he admitted, there was lots of hard work to be done. He'd never dream of handing that sentence to the printe r in its present form . For though it sometimes 
satisfied him, he was fully aware it didn't quite hit the mark as yet, and also that to some 
extent it had a facility of tone approximati ng, remotely perhaps, but recognizably, to the 
commonplace. That was more or less what he  was saying when they heard the sound of 
people running in the st reet below the window. 
 Rieux stood up.  "Just wait and see what I make of it," Grand said, and, glancing toward the 
window, added: "When all this is over." 
 But then the sound of hurried footsteps came again. Rieux was already halfway down the stairs, and when he stepped out into the street two men brushed past him. They 
seemed to be on their way to one of the town gates. In fact, what with the heat and the 
plague, some of our fellow citizens were losing their heads; there had already been some scenes of violence and nightly attempts were made to elude the sentries and escape to the 
outside world.   OTHERS, too, Rambert for example, were tryi ng to escape from this atmosphere of 
growing panic, but with more skill and pe rsistence, if not wi th greater success. 
 For a while Rambert had gone on struggling with officialdom. If he was to be 
believed, he had always thought that perseverance would wi n through, inevitably, and, as 
he pointed out, resourcefulness in emergenc y was up his street, in a manner of speaking. 
So he plodded away, calling on all sorts of o fficials and others whose influence would 
have had weight in normal conditions. But, as things were, such influence was unavailing. For the most part they were men with well-defined and sound ideas on 
everything concerning exports, ba nking, the fruit or wine trad e; men of proved ability in 
handling problems relating to insurance, the in terpretation of ill-drawn  contracts, and the 
like; of high qualifications and evident good inte ntions. That, in fact, was what struck one 
most, the excellence of their intentions. Bu t as regards plague their competence was 
practically nil.  However, whenever opportunity arose, Rambert had tackled each of them and pleaded his cause. The gist of his argument was always the same: that he was a stranger to our town and, that being so, his case deserved speci al consideration. 
 Mostly the men he talked to conceded this point readily e nough. But usually they 
added that a good number of other people were  in a like case, and thus his position was 
not so exceptional as he seemed to suppose. To  this Rambert could reply that this did not 
affect the substance of his argument in any wa y. He was then told that it did affect the 
position, already difficult, of th e authorities, who were ag ainst showing any favoritism 
and thus running the risk of creating what , with obvious repugnance, they called "a 
precedent."  In conversation with Dr. Rieux, Rambert classified the people whom he had approached in various categories. Those who used the arguments mentioned above he called the sticklers. Besides these there were  the consolers, who assured him that the 
present state of things coul dn't possibly last and, when as ked for definite suggestions, 
fobbed him off by telling him he was ma king too much fuss about a passing 
inconvenience. Then there were the very important persons who asked the visitor to leave 
a brief note of his case and informed him th ey would decide on it in due course; the 
triflers, who offered him billeting warrants or gave the addresses of lodgings; the red-tape merchants, who made him fill up a form and promptly interred it in a file; overworked 
officials, who raised their arms to heav en, and much-harassed officials who simply 
looked away; and, finally, the traditionalists, these were by far the greatest number, who 
referred Rambert to another office or r ecommended some new method of approach.  These fruitless interviews had thoroughl y worn out the journalist; on the credit 
side he had obtained much insight into the inner workings of a municipal office and a 
Prefect's headquarters, by dint of sitting fo r hours on imitation-leathe r sofas, confronted 
by posters urging him to invest in savings bonds  exempt from income-t ax, or to enlist in 
the colonial army; and by dint of entering offices where human faces were as blank as the filing-cabinets and the dusty reco rds on the shelves behind them. 
 The only thing gained by all this expend iture of energy, Rambert told Rieux with 
a hint of bitterness, was that it served  to keep his mind off his predicament. 
 In fact, the rapid progress of the plague practically escaped his notice. Also, it 
made the days pass more quickly and, given the situation in which the whole town was 
placed, it might be said that every day liv ed through brought everyone, provided he 
survived, twenty-four hours near er the end of his ordeal. Rieux could but admit the truth 
of this reasoning, but to his mind its trut h was of rather too general an order. 
 At one moment Rambert had a gleam of hope. A form was sent him from the Prefect's office with instructions that he was to  fill in carefully all the blanks. It included 
questions concerning his ident ity, his family, his present a nd former sources of income; 
in fact, he was to give what is known as a curriculum vitae. He got an impression that 
inquiries were on foot with a view to drawing up a list of pe rsons who might be 
instructed to leave the town and return to their homes. Some vague information gleaned from an employee in one of the offices confirmed this impression. But on going further into the matter and finally discovering the office from which the form had emanated, he was told that this information was being colle cted with a view to certain contingencies. 
 "What contingencies?" he asked.  He then learned that the contingency was the possibility of his falling ill and 
dying of plague; the data supplied would enable the authorities to notify his family and also to decide if the hospital expenses shoul d be borne by the municipality or if, in due 
course, they could be recovered from his relatives. On the face of it this implied that he 
was not completely cut off from the woma n who was awaiting his return, since the 
powers that be were obviously giving heed to  both of them. But that was no consolation. 
The really remarkable thing, and Rambert was greatly struck by this, was the way in which, in the very midst of catastrophe, offi ces could go on functioning serenely and take 
initiatives of no immediate relevance, and often unknown to the highest authority, purely 
and simply because they had been created originally for this purpose.  The next phase was at once the easiest and the hardest for Rambert. It was a period of sheer lethargy. He had gone the round of offices, taken every step that could be 
taken, and realized that for the present all avenues of that ki nd were closed to him. So 
now he drifted aimlessly from cafe to cafe. In  the mornings he would sit on the terrace of 
one of them and read a newspaper in th e hope of finding some indication that the 
epidemic was on the wane. He would gaze at the faces of the passers-by, often turning away disgustedly from their look of unrelieve d gloom, and after reading for the nth time 
the shopsigns on the other side of the street , the advertisements of  popular drinks that 
were no longer procurable, would rise and wa lk again at random in  the yellow streets. 
 Thus he killed time till nightfall, m oving about the town and stopping now and 
then at a cafe or restaurant . One evening Rieux noticed hi m hovering round the door of a 
cafe, unable to make up his mind to enter. At last he decided to go in and sat down at a 
table at the back of the room. It was the ti me when, acting under or ders, cafe-proprietors deferred as long as possible turning on their lights. Gray dusk was seeping into the room, 
the pink of sunset glowed in the wall mirro rs, and the marble-topped tables glimmered 
white in the gathering darkness. Seated in the empty cafe, Rambert looked pathetically 
lost, a mere shade among the shadows, and Rieux guessed this was the hour when he felt 
most derelict. It was, indeed, the hour of day when all the prisoners of the town realized 
their dereliction and each was thinking that something, no matter what, must be done to 
hasten their deliverance. Rieux turned hurriedly away.  Rambert also spent a certain amount of time at the railroad station. No one was 
allowed on the platforms. But the waiting-r ooms, which could be entered from outside, 
remained open and, being cool and dark, were  often patronized by beggars on very hot 
days. Rambert spent much time studying the tim etables, reading the prohibitions against 
spitting, and the passengers' regulations.  After that he sat down in a corner. An old cast-iron stove, which had been stone-
cold for months, rose like a sort of landmark in the middle of the room, surrounded by figure-of-eight patterns on the floor, the tra ceries of long-past spri nklings. Posters on the 
walls gaily invited tourists to  a carefree holiday at Cannes or Bandol. And in his corner 
Rambert savored that bitter sense of free dom which comes of to tal deprivation. The 
evocations which at that time he found most  poignant were, anyhow according to what he 
told Rieux, those of Paris.  There rose before his eyes, unsummoned, vistas of old stones and riverbanks, the 
pigeons of the Palais-Royal, the Gare du No rd, quiet old streets round the Pantheon, and 
many another scene of the city he'd never known he loved so much, and these mental pictures killed all desire for any form of ac tion. Rieux felt fairly sure he was identifying 
these scenes with memories of his love. A nd when one day Rambert told him that he 
liked waking up at four in the morning a nd thinking of his beloved Paris, the doctor 
guessed easily enough, basing this on his own e xperience, that that was his favorite time 
for conjuring up pictures of the woman from whom he now was parted. This was, indeed, 
the hour when he could feel surest she was w holly his. Till four in the morning one is 
seldom doing anything and at that hour, even if  the night has been a night of betrayal, one 
is asleep. Yes, everyone sleeps at that hour, a nd this is reassuring, si nce the great longing 
of an unquiet heart is to possess constantly and consciously the love d one, or, failing that, 
to be able to plunge the loved one, when a time of absence interven es, into a dreamless 
sleep timed to last unbroken until the day they meet again.  Shortly after Father Paneloux's sermon the hot weather set in with a vengeance. 
 On the day following the unseasonable downpour of that Sunday, summer blazed out above the housetops. First a strong, scor ching wind blew steadily for a whole day, 
drying up the walls. And then the sun took ch arge, incessant waves of heat and light 
swept the town daylong, and but for arcaded  streets and the interiors of houses, 
everything lay naked to the dazzling impact of the light. The sun stalked our townsfolk 
along every byway, into every nook; a nd when they paused, it struck. 
 Since this first onslaught of the heat s ynchronized with a startling increase in the 
number of victims, there were now nearly seven hundred deaths a week, a mood of profound discouragement settled on the town. In the suburbs little was left of the wonted 
animation between the long flat streets and the terraced houses; ordinarily people living 
in these districts used to spend the best pa rt of the day on their doorsteps, but now every 
door was shut, nobody was to be seen, even th e Venetian blinds stayed down, and there was no knowing if it was the heat or the plague that they were trying to shut out. In some 
houses groans could be heard. At first, when  that happened, people often gathered outside 
and listened, prompted by curiosity or co mpassion. But under the prolonged strain it 
seemed that hearts had toughened; people lived beside those groans or  walked past them 
as though they had become the normal speech of men. 
 As a result of the fighting at the gates, in the course of which the police had had to 
use their revolvers, a spirit of lawlessness was abroad. Some had certainly been wounded 
in these brushes with  the police, but in the town, where, owing to the combined 
influences of heat and terror, everything wa s exaggerated, there was talk of deaths. One 
thing, anyhow, was certain; discontent was on the increase and, fear ing worse to come, 
the local officials debated lengthily on the measures to be taken if the populace, goaded 
to frenzy by the epidemic, got completely out of hand. The newspapers published new 
regulations reiterating the orde rs against attempting to leave the town and warning those 
who infringed them that they were li able to long terms of imprisonment. 
 A system of patrols was instituted and often in the empty, sweltering streets, heralded by a clatter of horse hoofs on the cobbles, a detachment of mounted police 
would make its way between the parallel line s of close-shut windows. Now and again a 
gunshot was heard; the special brigade recently  detailed to destroy cats and dogs, as 
possible carriers of infection, was at wor k. And these whipcrack sounds startling the 
silence increased the nervous tens ion already existing in the town. 
 For in the heat and stillness, and fo r the troubled hearts of our townsfolk, 
anything, even the least sound, had a heightened  significance. The varying aspects of the 
sky, the very smells rising from the soil that mark each change of season, were taken notice of for the first time. Everyone realized with dismay that hot weather would favor the epidemic, and it was clear that summer was setting in. The cries of swifts in the evening air above the housetops were growi ng shriller. And the sky, too, had lost the 
spaciousness of those June tw ilights when our horizons seem  infinitely remote. In the 
markets the flowers no longer came in buds; they  were already in full bloom, and after 
the morning's marketing the dusty pavements were littered with trampled petals. It was plain to see that spring had sp ent itself, lavished its ardor on the myriads of flowers that 
were bursting everywhere into bloom, and now was being crushed out by the twofold 
onslaught of heat and plague. For our fellow citizens that summer sky, and the streets 
thick in dust, gray as their present lives,  had the same ominous import as the hundred 
deaths now weighing daily on th e town. That incessant sunli ght and those bright hours 
associated with siesta or w ith holidays no longer invited, as in the past, to frolics and 
flirtation on the beaches. Now they rang hollow in the silence of the closed town, they 
had lost the golden spell of happier summers. Plague ha d killed all colors, vetoed 
pleasure.  That, indeed, was one of the great cha nges brought by the epid emic. Hitherto all 
of us welcomed summer in with pleasant an ticipation. The town was open to the sea and 
its young folk made free of the beaches. But this  summer, for all its nearness, the sea was 
out of bounds; young limbs had no longer the run of its delights. What could we do under 
these conditions? It is Tarrou once again who paints the most faithful picture of our life in 
those days. Needless to say, he outlines the pr ogress of the plague and he, too, notes that 
a new phase of the epidemic was ushered in when the radio announced no longer weekly totals, but ninety-two, a hundred and seven, and a hundred and thirty deaths in a day. "The newspapers and the authorities are play ing ball with the plague. They fancy they're 
scoring off it because a hundred and thirty is a smaller figure than nine hundred and ten." 
He also records such striking or moving incidents of the epidemic as came under his 
notice; that, for instance, of the woman in a lo nely street who abruptly opened a shuttered 
window just above his head and gave two loud shrieks before closing the shutters again 
on the dark interior of a bedroom. But he also noted that peppermint lozenges had 
vanished from the drugstores, because there was a popular belief that when sucking them 
you were proof against contagion.  He went on watching his pet specimen on the opposite balcony. It seemed that tragedy had come to the ancient small-game hunter as well. One morning there had been 
gunshots in the street and, as Tarrou put it, "s ome gobs of lead" had killed off most of the 
cats and scared away the othe rs; anyhow they were no longe r about. That day the little 
old man went on to his balcony at the usual hour, showed some su rprise, and, leaning on 
the rail, closely scanned the corners of the st reet. Then he settled down to wait, fretfully 
tapping the balustrade with hi s right hand. After staying ther e for some time he tore up a 
few sheets of paper, went back into his r oom, and came out again. After another longish 
wait he retreated again into the room, sl amming the french windows behind him. He 
followed the same procedure daily during the rest of the week, and the sadness and bewilderment on the old face deepened as the days went by.  On the eighth day Tarrou waited in vain for his appearance; the windows stayed resolutely closed on all too comprehensible  distress. This entry ends with Tarrou's 
summing up. "It is forbidden to spit on cats in plague-time." 
 In another context Tarro u notes that, on coming home in the evenings, he 
invariably saw the night watchman paci ng the hall, like a sentry on his beat. 
 The man never failed to remind everyone he met that he'd foreseen what was 
happening. 
 Tarrou agreed that he'd predicted a di saster, but reminded him that the event 
predicted by him was an earthquake. To whic h the old fellow replie d: "Ah, if only it had 
been an earthquake! A good bad shock, and there you are! You count the dead and living, 
and that's an end of it. But this here damned disease, even them who haven't got it can't 
think of anything else."  The manager of the hotel was equally dow nhearted. In the early days travelers, 
unable to leave the town, had kept on th eir rooms. But one by one, seeing that the 
epidemic showed no sign of abating, they m oved out to stay with friends. And the same 
cause that had led to all the rooms' being occupied now kept them empty, since there 
were no newcomers to the town. Tarrou was one of the very few remaining guests, and the manager never lost an opportunity of inform ing him that, were he not reluctant to put 
these gentlemen to inconvenience, he would have closed the hotel  long ago. He often 
asked Tarrou to say how long he thought th e epidemic would last. "They say," Tarrou 
informed him, "that cold weather stamps out diseases of this type." The manager looked 
aghast. "But, my dear sir, it's never really cold in these parts. And, anyhow, that would 
mean it's going to last many months more." Mo reover, he was sure that for a long while 
to come travelers would give the town a wide  berth. This epidemic spelt the ruin of the 
tourist trade, in fact.  After a short absence M. Othon, the owlis h paterfamilias, made a reappearance in 
the restaurant, but accompan ied only by the two "performi ng poodles," his offspring. On inquiry it came out that Mme Othon was in quarantine; she had been nursing her mother, 
who had succumbed to plague.  "I don't like it a bit," th e manager told Tarrou. "Quarantine or not, she's under 
suspicion, which means that they are, too."  Tarrou pointed out that, if it came to that, everyone was "under suspicion." But 
the manager had his own ideas and was not to be shaken out of them.  "No, sir. You and I, we're not under suspicion. But they certainly are."  However, M. Othon was impervious to su ch considerations and would not let the 
plague change his habits. He entered the rest aurant with his wonted  dignity, sat down in 
front of his children, and addressed to th em at intervals the same nicely worded, 
unamiable remarks. Only the small boy looked somewhat different; dr essed in black like 
his sister, a little more shrunken than before , he now seemed a miniature replica of his 
father. The night watchman, who had no liking for M. Othon, had said of him to Tarrou:  "That fine gentleman will pass out with  his clothes on. All dressed up and ready 
to go. So he won't need no laying-out."  Tarrou has some comments on the sermon preached by Paneloux: "I can 
understand that type of fervor and find it not displeasing. At th e beginning of a pestilence 
and when it ends, there's always a propensity for rhetoric. In the first case, habits have not 
yet been lost; in the s econd, they're returning. It is in the thick of a calamity  that one gets 
hardened to the truth, in other wo rds, to silence. So let's wait." 
 Tarrou also records that he had a long ta lk with Dr. Rieux; all he remembered was 
that it had "good results." In this connection he notes the color of Mme Rieux's, the 
doctor's mother's, eyes, a limpid brown, and makes the odd observation that a gaze revealing so much goodness of heart would always triumph over plague. 
 He has also a good deal to say about Ri eux's asthma patient. He went with the 
doctor to see him, immediately after their conversation. The old man greeted Tarrou with 
a chuckle and rubbed his hands cheerfully. He was sitting up in bed with the usual two 
pans of dried peas in front of him. "Ah, here 's another of 'em!" he exclaimed when he saw 
Tarrou. "It's a topsy-turvy world all right, mo re doctors than patients. Because it's 
mowing them down, ain't it, more and more.  That priest's right; we were asking fo r it." Next day Tarrou came to see him 
without warning.  From Tarrou's notes we gather th at the old man, a dry-goods dealer by 
occupation, decided at the age of fifty that he'd done enough work for a lifetime. He took 
to his bed and never left it again, but not because of his asthma, which would not have 
prevented his getting about. A small fixed income had seen him through to his present age, seventyfive, and the years had not damped his cheerfulness. He couldn't bear the sight of a watch, and indeed there wasn't one in the whole house. "Watches," he said, "are 
silly gadgets, and dear at that." He worked out the time, that is to say, the time for meals, with his two saucepans, one of which was always full of peas when he woke in the morning. He filled the other, pea by pea, at a constant, carefully regulated speed. Thus 
time for him was reckoned by these pans and he could take his b earings in it at any 
moment of the day. "Every fifteen pans," he  said, "it's feeding- time. What could be 
simpler?"  If his wife was to be trusted, he had gi ven signs of his vocation at a very early 
age. Nothing, in fact, had ever interested him; his work, friendshi p, cafes, music, women, outings, to all he was indifferent. He had ne ver left his home town except once when he 
had been called to Algiers for family affairs, and even then he had alighted from the train 
at the first station after Oran, incapable of continuing the adventure. He took the first 
train back.  To Tarrou, who had shown surprise at th e secluded life he le d, he had given the 
following explanation, more or less. According to  religion, the first half of a man's life is 
an upgrade; the second goes downhill. On the descending days he has no claim, they may 
be snatched from him at any moment; thus he can do nothing with them and the best thing, precisely, is to do nothing with them . He obviously had no compunction about 
contradicting himself, for a fe w minutes later he told Tarrou that God did not exist, since 
otherwise there would be no need for prie sts. But, from some observations which 
followed, Tarrou realized that the old fellow' s philosophy was closely involved with the 
irritation caused by the house-to-h ouse collections in aid of charities, which took place 
almost incessantly in that part of the tow n. What completed the picture of the old man 
was a desire he expressed several times, and which seemed deeply rooted: the desire to 
die at a very advanced age.  "Is he a saint?" Tarrou asked himself, a nd answered: "Yes, if saintliness is an 
aggregate of habits."  Meanwhile Tarrou was compiling a longish description of a day in the plague-
stricken town; it was to give a full and accurate picture of th e life of our fellow citizens 
during that summer. "Nobody la ughs," Tarrou observes, "except the drunks, and they 
laugh too much." After which he embarks on his description.  "At daybreak light breaths of air fan the still empty streets. At this hour, between the night's victims and the death-agonies of th e coming day, it is as if for a while plague 
stays its hand and takes breath. All shops are shut. But on some a notice: Closed owing to 
plague, shows that when the others open presently, these will not. Still half-asleep, the 
newsboys do not yet cry the news but, lounging at  street corners, offer their wares to the 
lamp-posts, with the vague gestures of sleepwalkers. Soon, awakened by the early 
streetcars, they will fan out through the tow n, holding at arm's length sheets on which the 
word PLAGUE looms large. Will there be a plague autumn? Professor B. says: 'No.' Toll 
of the 94th day of plague: 124 deaths.  "In spite of the growing shortage of pa per, which has compelled some dailies to 
reduce their pages, a new paper has been launc hed: the Plague Chronicle, which sets out 
'to inform our townspeople, with scrupulous ve racity, of the daily pr ogress or recession of 
the disease; to supply th em with the most authoritative opi nions available as to its future 
course; to offer the hospitality of its columns to  all, in whatever walk of life, who wish to 
join in combating the epidemic; to keep up the morale of the populace; to publish the 
latest orders issued by the aut horities; and to centralize the efforts of all who desire to 
give active and wholehearted help in the present emergenc y.' Actually this newspaper 
very soon came to devote its columns to advertisements of new, 'infallible' antidotes against plague.  "Toward six in the morning all these papers  are being sold to the lines that begin 
to form outside the shops over an hour before  they open; then to the passengers alighting 
from the streetcars coming in, packed to capacity, from the suburbs. The cars are now the only means of transport, and they have much difficulty in progressing, what with people standing on the running-boards and hanging in cl usters from the handrails. A queer thing is how the passengers all try to keep their backs turned to th eir neighbors, twisting 
themselves into grotesque att itudes in the attempt, the idea being, of course, to avoid 
contagion. At every stop a catar act of men and women is disgor ged, each in haste to put a 
safe distance between himsel f or herself and the rest. 
 "When the first cars have gone by, the to wn gradually wakes up, early cafes open 
their doors, and you see an array of cards on the counter: No Coffee, Bring Your Own 
Sugar, and the like. Next the shops open and the streets grow livelie r. And meanwhile the 
light is swelling and the sky, even at this early hour, beginn ing to grow leaden-hued with 
heat. This is the time when those who ha ve nothing to do venture out on the boulevards. 
Most of them seem determined to counterac t the plague by a lavi sh display of luxury. 
Daily, about eleven, you see a sort of dress parade of youths and girls, who make you 
realize the frantic desire for lif e that thrives in the heart of every great calamity. If the 
epidemic spreads, morals too will broaden, a nd we may see again the saturnalia of Milan, 
men and women dancing round the graves. 
 "At noon, in a flash, all the restaurants fill up. Very quickly small groups of people unable to find a seat form at the doors.  Because of the intense heat the sky is 
losing its brightness. Under big awnings the aspirants to food wait their turn, aligned 
along the curbs of streets gaping and sizzli ng in the fires of noon. The reason for the 
restaurants' being so crowded is that they solve for many the feeding problem. But they 
do nothing to allay the fear of contagion.  Many of the customers spend several mi nutes methodically wiping their plates. 
Not long ago some restaurants put up notices : Our plates, knives, and forks guaranteed 
sterilized. But gradually they discontinued publ icity of this order, since their customers 
came in any case. People, moreover, spend very  freely. Choice wines, or wines alleged to 
be such, the costliest extras, a mood of reckle ss extravagance is setti ng in. It seems that 
there was something like a panic in a restaurant  because a customer suddenly felt ill, went 
very white, and staggered pr ecipitately to the door. 
 "Toward two o'clock the town slowly em pties, it is the time when silence, 
sunlight, dust, and plague have the streets to  themselves. Wave after wave of heat flows 
over the frontage of the tall gray house s during these long, lan guid hours. Thus the 
afternoon wears on, slowly merging into an ev ening that settles down like a red winding-
sheet on the serried tumult of the town. At  the start of the great heat, for some 
unascertained reason, the evenings found the streets almost empty. But now the least ripple of cooler air brings an easing of the st rain, if not a flutter of  hope. Then all stream 
out into the open, drug themselves with talki ng, start arguing or l ove-making, and in the 
last glow of sunset the town, freighted with lovers two by two and l oud with voices, drifts 
like a helmless ship into the throbbing darkne ss. In vain a zealous evangelist with a felt 
hat and flowing tie threads his way through the crowd, crying without cease: 'God is great and good. Come unto Him.' On th e contrary, they all make haste toward some trivial 
objective that seems of more immediate interest than God. 
 "In the early days, when they though t this epidemic was much like other 
epidemics, religion held its ground. But once thes e people realized their instant peril, they 
gave their thoughts to pleasure.  And all the hideous fears th at stamp their faces in the 
daytime are transformed in the fiery, dusty nigh tfall into a sort of hectic exaltation, an 
unkempt freedom fevering their blood.  "And I, too, I'm no different. But what matter? Death means nothing to men like 
me. It's the event that proves them right. It was Tarrou who had asked Rieux for the interview he refers to in his diary. On that  evening, as it happened, just before Tarrou 
arrived, the doctor had gazed for some moments at his mother, who was sitting very still 
in a corner of the dining-room. Once her hous ehold tasks were over, she spent most of 
her time in that chair. Her hands folded in  her lap, she sat there waiting. Rieux wasn't 
even sure it was for him she waited. However, something always changed in his mother's 
face when he came in. The silent resignation th at a laborious life had given it seemed to 
light up with a sudden glow. Then she returned to her tranquillity. That evening she was gazing out of the window at the now empty street. The street lighting had been reduced by two thirds, and only at long intervals a la mp cast flickering gleams through the thick 
darkness of the town.  "Will they keep to the reduced lighting as long as the plague lasts?" Mme Rieux 
asked.  "I expect so."  "Let's hope it doesn't last till wint er. It would be terribly depressing." 
 "Yes," Rieux said.  He saw his mother's gaze settle on his forehead. He knew that the worry and overwork of the last few days had scored their traces there.  "Didn't things go well t oday?" his mother asked. 
 "Oh, much as usual."  As usual! That was to say the new consignment of serum sent from Paris seemed less effective than the first,  and the death-rate was risi ng. It was still impossible to 
administer prophylactic inoculations elsewhere than in families already attacked; if its 
use was to be generalized, very large quanti ties of the vaccine would have been needed. 
Most of the buboes refused to burst, it was as  if they underwent a s easonal hardening, and 
the victims suffered horribly. During the last twenty-four hours there had been two cases 
of a new form of the epidemic; the plague was becoming pneumonic. On this very day, in the course of a meeting, the much-harasse d doctors had pressed the Prefect, the 
unfortunate man seemed quite at his wits' end, to issue new regulations to prevent 
contagion being carried from mouth to m outh, as happens in pneumonic plague. The 
Prefect had done as they wished, but as usua l they were groping, more or less, in the 
dark.  Looking at his mother, he felt an uprush of a half-forgotten em otion, the love of 
his boyhood, at the sight of her soft brown gaze intent on him.  "Don't you ever feel alarmed, Mother?"  "Oh, at my age there isn't much left to fear."  "The days are very long, and just now I'm hardly ever at home."  "I don't mind waiting, if I know you're going to come back. And when you aren't here, I think of what you're  doing. Have you any news?" 
 "Yes, if I'm to believe the last telegr am, everything's going as well as could be 
expected. But I know she says that to prevent my worrying."  The doorbell rang. The doctor gave his mo ther a smile and went to open the door. 
 In the dim light on the landing Tarrou looke d like a big gray bear. Rieux gave his 
visitor a seat facing his desk, while he hims elf remained standing behind the desk chair. 
Between them was the only light in the room, a desk lamp.  Tarrou came straight to the point. "I know," he said, "tha t I can talk to you quite 
frankly." 
 Rieux nodded.  "In a fortnight, or a month at most," Tarrou continued, "you'll serve no purpose here. Things will have got out of hand."  "I agree."  "The sanitary department is ineffici ent, understaffed, for one thing, and you're 
worked off your feet."  Rieux admitted this was so.  "Well," Tarrou said, "I've heard that th e authorities are thinking of a sort of 
conscription of the population, and all men in good health will be required to help in 
fighting the plague."  "Your information was correct. But the au thorities are in none too good odor as it 
is, and the Prefect can't make up his mind."  "If he daren't risk compulsion, why not call for voluntary help?" 
 "It's been done. The response was poor."  "It was done through official channels, and half-heartedly. What they're short on 
is imagination. Officialdom can never cope with something really catastrophic. And the 
remedial measures they think up are hardly adequate for a common co ld. If we let them 
carry on like this they'll soon be dead, and so shall we."  "That's more than likely," Rieux said . "I should tell you, however, that they're 
thinking of using the prisoners in the ja ils for what we call the 'heavy work.' 
 "  "I'd rather free men were employed."  "So would I. But might I ask why you feel like that?" 
 "I loathe men's being condemned to death." 
 Rieux looked Tarrou in the eyes. 
 "So what?" he asked.  "It's this I have to say. I've drawn up a plan for voluntary groups of helpers. 
 Get me empowered to try out my plan, and then let's sidetrack officialdom. In any case the authorities have their hands more than full already. I have friends in many walks of life; they'll form a nucleus to start from. And, of course, I'll take part in it myself." 
 "I need hardly tell you," Ri eux replied, "that I accept your suggestion most gladly. 
One can't have too many helpers, especially  in a job like mine under present conditions. I 
undertake to get your plan approved by the authorities.  Anyhow, they've, no choice. But?" Rie ux pondered. "But I take it you know that 
work of this kind may prove fatal to the wo rker. And I feel I should ask you this; have 
you weighed the dangers?"  Tarrou's gray eyes met the doctor's gaze serenely.  "What did you think of Paneloux's sermon, doctor?"  The question was asked in a quite ordinary  tone, and Rieux answered in the same 
tone.  "I've seen too much of hospitals to relish any idea of collective punishment. 
 But, as you know, Christians sometimes say that sort of thing without really thinking it. They're better than they seem."  "However, you think, like Paneloux, that the plague has its good side; it opens 
men's eyes and forces them to take thought?" 
 The doctor tossed his head impatiently.  "So does every ill that flesh is heir to. What's true of all the evils in the world is true of plague as well. It helps men to ri se above themselves. All the same, when you see 
the misery it brings, you'd need to be a madm an, or a coward, or st one blind, to give in 
tamely to the plague."  Rieux had hardly raised his voice at all; but Ta rrou made a slight gesture as if to 
calm him. He was smiling.  "Yes." Rieux shrugged his shoulders. "But  you haven't answered my question yet. 
 Have you weighed the consequences?"  Tarrou squared his shoulders against the b ack of the chair, then moved his head 
forward into the light.  "Do you believe in God, doctor?"  Again the question was put in an ordinary  tone. But this time Rieux took longer to 
find his answer.  "No, but what does that really mean? I'm fumbling in the dark, struggling to make 
something out. But I've long ceased finding that original."  "Isn't that it, the gulf between Paneloux and you?"  "I doubt it. Paneloux is a ma n of learning, a scholar. He hasn't come in contact 
with death; that's why he can speak with such  assurance of the truth, with a capital T. But 
every country priest who visits his parishio ners and has heard a man gasping for breath 
on his deathbed thinks as I do. He'd try to relieve human suffering be fore trying to point 
out its excellence." Rieux stood up; his face was now in shadow. "Let's drop the subject," 
he said, "as you won't answer."  Tarrou remained seated in his chair; he was smiling again. 
 "Suppose I answer with a question." 
 The doctor now smiled, too.  "You like being mysterious, don't you? Yes, fire away."  "My question's this," said Tarrou. "Why do you yourself show such devotion, considering you don't believe in God? I suspec t your answer may help me to mine." 
 His face still in shadow, Rieux said that he'd already answered: that if he believed 
in an all-powerful God he would cease curing the sick and leave that to Him. But no one 
in the world believed in a God of that sor t; no, not even Paneloux, w ho believed that he 
believed in such a God. And this was proved by the fact that no one  ever threw himself 
on Providence completely. Anyhow, in this resp ect Rieux believed himself to be on the 
right road, in fighting agai nst creation as he found it. 
 "Ah," Tarrou remarked. "So that's th e idea you have of your profession?" 
 "More or less." The doctor came back into the light.  Tarrou made a faint whistling noise with his lips, and the doctor gazed at him. 
 "Yes, you're thinking it calls for pride to  feel that way. But I assure you I've no 
more than the pride that's needed to keep me going. I have no idea what's awaiting me, or what will happen when all this ends. For the moment I know this; there are sick people and they need curing. Later on, perhaps, they' ll think things over; and so shall I. But 
what's wanted now is to make them well. I defend them as best I can, that's all." 
 "Against whom?"  Rieux turned to the window. A shadow-lin e on the horizon told of the presence of 
the sea. He was conscious only of his exhaus tion, and at the same time was struggling 
against a sudden, irrational impulse to unburde n himself a little more to his companion; 
an eccentric, perhaps, but who, he guessed, was one of his own kind. 
 "I haven't a notion, Tarrou; I assure you I haven't a notion. When I entered this 
profession, I did it 'abstractedly,' so to speak; because I had a desire for it, because it meant a career like another, one that young me n often aspire to. Perhaps, too, because it 
was particularly difficult for a workman's s on, like myself. And then I had to see people 
die. Do you know that there are some who refuse to die? Have you ever heard a woman scream 'Never!' with her last gasp? Well, I have. And then I saw that I could never get 
hardened to it. I was young then, and I was out raged by the whole scheme of things, or so 
I thought.  Subsequently I grew more modest. Only, I've never managed to get used to seeing people die. That's all I know. Yet after all?"  Rieux fell silent and sat down. He felt his mouth dry. 
 "After all?" Tarrou prompted softly.  "After all," the doctor repeated, then hesitated again, fixing his eyes on Tarrou, 
"it's something that a man of your sort can und erstand most likely, but, since the order of 
the world is shaped by death, mightn't it be bett er for God if we refuse to believe in Him 
and struggle with all our might against death, without raising our eyes  toward the heaven 
where He sits in silence."  Tarrou nodded.  "Yes. But your victories will never be lasting; that's all."  Rieux's face darkened.  "Yes, I know that. But it's no reason for giving up the struggle."  "No reason, I agree. Only, I now can pictur e what this plague must mean for you." 
 "Yes. A never ending defeat."  Tarrou stared at the doctor for a moment , then turned and tramped heavily toward 
the door. Rieux followed him and was almost at his side when Tarrou, who was staring at the floor, suddenly said:  "Who taught you all this, doctor?"  The reply came promptly:  "Suffering."  Rieux opened the door of his surgery and told Tarrou that he, too, was going out; he had a patient to visit in the suburbs. Ta rrou suggested they shoul d go together and he 
agreed. In the hall they enc ountered Mme Rieux, and the docto r introduced Tarrou to her. 
 "A friend of mine," he said.  "Indeed," said Mme Rieux, "I'm very  pleased to make your acquaintance." 
 When she left them Tarrou turned to gaze after her. On the landing the doctor 
pressed a switch to turn on the lights along the stairs. But the st airs remained in darkness. 
Possibly some new light-saving order had come  into force. Really, however, there was no 
knowing; for some time past, in the streets no less than in private houses, everything had 
been going out of order. It might be only that  the concierge, like nearly everyone in the 
town, was ceasing to bother about his duties, The doctor had no time to follow up his thoughts; Tarrou's voice came from behind him.  "Just one word more, doctor, even if it sounds to you a bit nonsensical. You are 
perfectly right."  The doctor merely gave a littl e shrug, unseen in the darkness. 
 "To tell the truth, all that's outside my range. But you? what do you know about 
it?"  "Ah," Tarrou replied quite cooll y, "I've little left to learn." 
 Rieux paused and, behind him, Tarrou' s foot slipped on a step. He steadied 
himself by gripping the doctor's shoulder.  "Do you really imagine you know everything about life?" 
 The answer came through the darkness in the same cool, confident tone. 
 "Yes."  Once in the street, they realized it must  be quite late, eleven perhaps. All was 
silence in the town, except for some vague rustlings. An ambulance bell clanged faintly 
in the distance. They stepped into the car and Rieux started the engine. 
 "You must come to the hospital tomorrow," he said, "for an injection. But, before 
embarking on this adventure, you'd better know  your chances of coming out of it alive; 
they're one in three."  "That sort of reckoning doesn't hold wate r; you know it, doctor, as well as I. A 
hundred years ago plague wiped out the entire population of a town in Persia, with one 
exception. And the sole survivor was precise ly the man whose job it was to wash the 
dead bodies, and who carried on throughout the epidemic."  "He pulled off his one-in-three chance, th at's all." Rieux had lowered his voice. 
"But you're right; we know next to nothing on the subject."  They were entering the suburbs. The h eadlights lit up empty streets. The car 
stopped. Standing in front of it, Rieux asked Tarrou if he'd like to come in.  Tarrou said: "Yes." A glimmer of li ght from the sky lit up their faces. 
 Suddenly Rieux gave a short laugh, and there was much friendliness in it. 
 "Out with it, Tarrou! What on earth prompted you to take a hand in this?" 
 "I don't know. My code of morals, perhaps."  "Your code of morals? What code?"  "Comprehension."  Tarrou turned toward the house and Rieux did not see his face again until they were in the old asthma patient's room.   NEXT day Tarrou set to work and enrolled a first team of workers, soon to be followed 
by many others.  However, it is not the narrator's intention to ascribe to these sanitary groups more importance than their due. Doubtless today many of our fellow citizens are apt to yield to the temptation of exaggerating the services they rendered. But the narrator is inclined to think that by attributing overimportance to praiseworthy act ions one may, by implication, 
be paying indirect but potent homage to the worse side of human nature. For this attitude implies that such actions shine out as ra re exceptions, while callousness and apathy are 
the general rule. The narrator does not shar e that view. The evil that is in the world 
always comes of ignorance, and good intentions  may do as much harm as malevolence, if 
they lack understanding. On the whole, men are more good than bad; that, however, isn't the real point. But they are more or less ignoran t, and it is this that we call vice or virtue; 
the most incorrigible vice being that of an  ignorance that fancies it knows everything and 
therefore claims for itself the right to kill. The soul of the murderer is blind; and there can 
be no true goodness nor tr ue love without the ut most clear-sightedness. 
 Hence the sanitary groups, whose creati on was entirely Tarrou's work, should be 
considered with objectivity as well as w ith approval. And this is why the narrator 
declines to vaunt in over-glowing terms a courage and a devotion to which he attributes 
only a relative and reasonable importance. But he will continue being the chronicler of the troubled, rebellious hearts of our to wnspeople under the impact of the plague. 
 Those who enrolled in the "sanitary squa ds," as they were called, had, indeed, no 
such great merit in doing as they did, since they knew it was the only thing to do, and the 
unthinkable thing would then have been not to have brought themselves to do it. These groups enabled our townsfolk to come to grip s with the disease and convinced them that, 
now that plague was among us, it was up to them  to do whatever could be done to fight it. 
Since plague became in this way some men's dut y, it revealed itself as what it really was; 
that is, the concern of all.  So far, so good. But we do not congratul ate a schoolmaster on teaching that two 
and two make four, though we may, perhap s, congratulate him on having chosen his 
laudable vocation. Let us then  say it was praiseworthy that Tarrou and so many others 
should have elected to prove th at two and two make four rath er than the contrary; but let 
us add that this good will of theirs was one that is shared by the schoolmaster and by all 
who have the same feelings as the schoolmast er, and, be it said to the credit of mankind, 
they are more numerous than one would thi nk, such, anyhow, is the narrator's conviction. 
Needless to say, he can see quite clearly a poin t that could be made against him, which is 
that these men were risking their lives. But again and again there comes a time in history when the man who dares to say that two a nd two make four is punished with death. 
 The schoolteacher is well aw are of this. And the question is not one of knowing 
what punishment or reward attends the making of this calculation. The question is that of 
knowing whether two and two do make four. For those of our townsfolk who risked their 
lives in this predicament the issue was whet her or not plague was in their midst and 
whether or not they must fight against it.  Many fledgling moralists in those days were going about our  town proclaiming 
there was nothing to be done about it and we should bow to the inevitable. And Tarrou, 
Rieux, and their friends might give one answer  or another, but its conclusion was always 
the same, their certitude that a fight must be put up, in this way or that, and there must be 
no bowing down. The essential thing was to save  the greatest possibl e number of persons 
from dying and being doomed to unending sepa ration. And to do this there was only one 
resource: to fight the plague. There was not hing admirable about this attitude; it was 
merely logical.  Thus it was only natural that old Dr. Castel should plod away with unshaken 
confidence, never sparing himself, at maki ng anti-plague serum on the spot with the 
makeshift equipment at his disposal. Rieux shared his hope that a vaccine made with cultures of the bacilli obtained locally would take effect more actively than serum coming 
from outside, since the local ba cillus differed slightly from the normal plague bacillus as 
defined in textbooks of tropical diseases. And Castel expected to have his first supply 
ready within a surprisingly short period.  That, too, is why it was natural that Grand, who had nothing of the hero about 
him, should now be acting as a sort of general secretary to the sanitary squads. 
 A certain number of the groups orga nized by Tarrou were working in the 
congested areas of the town, w ith a view to improving the sani tary conditions there. Their 
duties were to see that houses were kept in a proper hygienic state and to list attics and 
cellars that had not been disi nfected by the official sanita ry service. Other teams of 
volunteers accompanied the doctors on their house-to-house vi sits, saw to the evacuation 
of infected persons, and subsequently, owing to  the shortage of drivers, even drove the 
vehicles conveying sick persons and dead bodies. All this involved the upkeep of 
registers and statistics, and Grand undertook the task. 
 From this angle, the narrator holds th at, more than Rieux or Tarrou, Grand was 
the true embodiment of the quiet courage that  inspired the sanitary groups. He had said 
yes without a moment's hesitation and with  the large-hearted-ness that was a second 
nature with him. All he had asked was to be  allotted light duties: he was too old for 
anything else. He could give his time from  six to eight every evening. When Rieux 
thanked him with some warmth, he seemed surp rised. "Why, that's not difficult! Plague is 
here and we've got to make a stand, that's  obvious. Ah, I only wish everything were as 
simple!" And he went back to his phrase. Sometimes in the evening, when he had filed 
his reports and worked out his statistics, Gr and and Rieux would have a chat. Soon they 
formed the habit of including Tarrou in th eir talks and Grand unburdened himself with 
increasingly apparent pleasur e to his two companions. They  began to take a genuine 
interest in the laborious literary task to wh ich he was applying himself while plague raged 
around him. Indeed, they, too, found in  it a relaxation of the strain. 
 "How's your young lady on horseback pr ogressing?" Tarrou would ask. And 
invariably Grand would answer with a wr y smile: "Trotting along, trotting along!" One 
evening Grand announced that he had definitely  discarded the adjective "elegant" for his 
horsewoman.  From now on it was replaced by "slim."  "That's more concrete," he explained.  Soon after, he read out to his two friends the new version of the sentence:  " 'One fine morning in May a slim  young horsewoman might have been seen 
riding a handsome sorrel mare along the flow ery avenues of the Bois de Boulogne.' 
 "Don't you agree with me one sees her better that way? And I've put 'one fine morning in May' because 'in the month of May' tended rather to drag out the trot, if you see what I mean."  Next he showed some anxiety about the adjective "handsome." In his opinion it 
didn't convey enough, and he set to looking for an epithet that would promptly and clearly "photograph" the superb  animal he saw with his mind's eye. "Plump" wouldn't do; 
though concrete enough, it sounded perhaps a l ittle disparaging, also a shade vulgar. 
"Beautifully groomed" had tempte d him for a moment, but it was cumbrous and made the 
rhythm limp somewhat. Then one evening he an nounced triumphantly that he had got it: 
"A black sorrel mare." To his thinking, he explained, "black" conveyed a hint of elegance 
and opulence.  "It won't do," Rieux said. "Why not?"  "Because 'sorrel' doesn't mean a breed of horse; it's a color."  "What color?"  "Well, er, a color that, anyhow, isn't black." Grand seemed greatly troubled. 
 "Thank you," he said warmly. "How fortuna te you're here to help me! But you see 
how difficult it is."  "How about 'glossy'?" Tarrou suggested.  Grand gazed at him meditatively, then  "Yes!" he exclaimed. "That's good." And 
slowly his lips parted in a smile.  Some days later he confessed that the word "flowery" was bothering him considerably. As the only towns he knew were Oran and Montelimar, he sometimes asked his friends to tell him about the avenue s of the Bois de Boulogne, what sort of 
flowers grew in them and how they were disposed. Actually neither  Rieux nor Tarrou had 
ever gathered the impression that those ave nues were "flowery," but Grand's conviction 
on the subject shook their conf idence in their memories. 
 He was amazed at their uncertainty. "It' s only artists who know how to use their 
eyes," was his conclusion. But one evening the doctor found him in a state of much 
excitement. For "flowery" he had substituted "flower-strewn." He was rubbing his hands. "At last one can see them, smell them! Hats off, gentlemen!" Triumphantly he read out 
the sentence:  "One fine morning in May a slim young horsewoman might have been seen riding 
a glossy sorrel mare alon g the flower-strewn avenues of the Bois de Boulogne." 
 But, spoken aloud, the numerous "s" sounds  had a disagreeable effect and Grand 
stumbled over them, lisping here and there. He  sat down, crestfallen;  then he asked the 
doctor if he might go. Some hard  thinking lay ahead of him. 
 It was about this time, as was subsequently learned, that he began to display signs of absentmindedness in the office. A serious vi ew was taken of these lapses of attention, 
as the municipality not only was working at high pressure with a re duced staff, but was 
constantly having new duties thrust upon it. His department suffered, and his chief took 
him severely to task, pointing out that he was paid to do certain work and was failing to do it as it should be done. "I am told that you are acting as  a voluntary helper in the 
sanitary groups. You do this out of office hour s, so it's no concern of mine. But the best 
way of making yourself useful in a terribl e time like this is to do your work well. 
Otherwise all the rest is useless."  "He's right," Grand said to Rieux.  "Yes, he's right," the doctor agreed.  "But I can't steady my thoughts; it's th e end of my phrase that's worrying me, I 
don't seem able to sort it out."  The plethora of sibilants in the sentence still offended his ear, but he saw no way of amending them without using what were, to his mind, inferior synonyms.  And that "flower-strewn" which had rejo iced him when he first lit on it now 
seemed unsatisfactory. How could one say the flowers were "strewn" when presumably 
they had been planted along the avenues, or el se grew there naturally ? On some evenings, 
indeed, he looked more tired than Rieux.  Yes, this unavailing quest which never left his mind had worn him out; none the less, he went on adding up the figures and compiling the statistics needed for the sanitary groups. Patiently every evening he brought his totals up to date, i llustrated them with 
graphs, and racked his brains to present his data in the most exact, clearest form. Quite often he went to see Rieux at one of the hos pitals and asked to be given a table in an office or the dispensary. He would settle down at it with his papers, exactly as he settled 
down at his desk in the Municipal Office, a nd wave each completed sheet to dry the ink 
in the warm air, noisome with disinfectants a nd the disease itself. At these times he made 
honest efforts not to think a bout his "horsewoman," and conc entrate on what he had to 
do.  Yes, if it is a fact that people like to have examples given them, men of the type 
they call heroic, and if it is  absolutely necessary that this narrative should include a 
"hero," the narrator commends to his readers, with, to his thinking, pe rfect justice, this 
insignificant and obscure hero who had to hi s credit only a little goodness of heart and a 
seemingly absurd ideal. This will render to the truth its due, to the addition of two and 
two its sum of four, and to heroism the secondary  place that rightly falls  to it, just after, 
never before, the noble claim of happiness. It will also give this ch ronicle its character, 
which is intended to be that of a narrative ma de with good feelings, that is to say, feelings 
that are neither demonstrably bad nor overcha rged with emotion in the ugly manner of a 
stage-play.  Such at least was Dr. Rieux's opinion when he read in newspapers or heard on the radio the messages and encouragement the outer world transmitted to the plague-ridden populace. Besides the comforts sent by air or overland, compassionate or admiring comments were lavished on the henceforth isol ated town, by way of newspaper articles or 
broadcast talks. And invariably their epical or  prize-speech verbiage  jarred on the doctor. 
Needless to say, he knew the sympathy was genuine enough. But it could be expressed only in the conventional language  with which men try to express what unites them with 
mankind in general; a vocabulary quite unsuite d, for example, to Grand's small daily 
effort, and incapable of describing what  Grand stood for under plague conditions. 
 Sometimes at midnight, in the great silence of the sleep- bound town, the doctor 
turned on his radio before going to bed for th e few hours' sleep he allowed himself. And 
from the ends of the earth, across thousands  of miles of land a nd sea, kindly, well-
meaning speakers tried to voice their fellow-f eeling, and indeed did so, but at the same 
time proved the utter incapacity of every man truly to share in suffering that he cannot 
see. "Oran! Oran!" In vain the call rang ove r oceans, in vain Rieux listened hopefully; 
always the tide of eloquence began to flow, bringing home still more the unbridgeable 
gulf that lay between Grand and the speak er. "Oran, we're with you!" they called 
emotionally. But not, the doctor told himself, to  love or to die together? "and that's the 
only way.  They're too remote."  And, as it so happens, what has yet to be recorded before coming to the culmination, during the period when the plague was gathering all its forces to fling them 
at the town and lay it waste, is the l ong, heartrendingly monotonous struggle put up by 
some obstinate people like Rambert to recover th eir lost happiness and to balk the plague 
of that part of themselves which they were  ready to defend in the last ditch. This was 
their way of resisting the bondage closing in upon them, and while their resistance lacked 
the active virtues of the other, it had (to the narrator's thinking ) its point, and moreover it 
bore witness, even lit its futility and incoherences, to a salutary pride. 
 Rambert fought to prevent the plague fr om besting him. Once assured that there 
was no way of getting out of the town by lawful methods, he decided, as he told Rieux, to have recourse to others. He began by sounding cafe waiters. A waiter usually knows much of what's going on behind the scenes. But the first he spoke to knew only of the 
very heavy penalties imposed on such attempts at evasion. In one of the cafes he visited 
he was actually taken for a stool-pigeon and cu rtly sent about his business. It was not 
until he happened to meet Cottard at Rieux's place that he made a little headway. On that day he and Rieux had been talking again about  his unsuccessful efforts to interest the 
authorities in his case, and Cottard h eard the tail end of the conversation. 
 Some days later Cottard met him in th e street and greeted him with the hail-
fellow-well-met manner that he now used on all occasions.  "Hello, Rambert! Still no luck?"  "None whatever."  "It's no good counting on the red-tape mercha nts. They couldn't understand if they 
tried."  "I know that, and I'm trying to find some other way. But it's damned difficult."  "Yes," Cottard replied. "It certainly is."  He, however, knew a way to go about it, and he explained to Rambert, who was 
much surprised to learn this, that for some time past he had been going the rounds of the 
cafes, had made a number of acquaintances, and had learned of the existence of an "organization" handling this so rt of business. The truth wa s that Cottard, who had been 
beginning to live above his m eans, was now involved in smuggling ventures concerned 
with rationed goods. Selling contraband cigarette s and inferior liquor at steadily rising 
prices, he was on the way to building up a small fortune.  "Are you quite sure of  this?" Rambert asked. 
 "Quite. I had a proposal of the so rt made to me the other day." 
 "But you didn't accept it."  "Oh, come, there's no need to be suspici ous." Cottard's tone was genial. "I didn't 
accept it because, personally, I've no wish to leave. I have my reasons." 
 After a short silence he added: "You don't ask me what my reasons are, I notice." 
 "I take it," Rambert replied, "that they're none of my business." 
 "That's so, in a way, of course. But from another angle? Well, let's put it like this: 
I've been feeling much more at eas e here since pla gue settled in." 
 Rambert made no comment. Then he asked:  "And how does one approach this organization, as you call it?"  "Ah," Cottard replied, "that's none too easy. Come with me."  It was four in the afternoon. The town was warming up to boiling-point under a sultry sky. Nobody was about, all shops were shuttered. Cottard and Rambert walked 
some distance without speaking, under the arcades. This was an hour of the day when the 
plague lay low, so to speak; the silence, th e extinction of all colo r and movement, might 
have been due as much to the fierce sunlight  as to the epidemic, and there was no telling 
if the air was heavy with menace or merely with dust and heat. You had to look closely 
and take thought to realize that plague was here. For it betray ed its presence only by 
negative signs. Thus Cottard, who had affinitie s with it, drew Rambert's attention to the 
absence of the dogs that in normal times would have been seen sprawling in the shadow of the doorways, panting, trying to fi nd a nonexistent patch of coolness. 
 They went along the boulevard des Palmiers, crossed the Place d'Armes, and then turned down toward the docks. On the left was a cafe painted gree n, with a wide awning 
of coarse yellow canvas projecting over th e sidewalk. Cottard and Rambert wiped their brows on entering. There were some small ir on tables, also painted green, and folding 
chairs. The room was empty, the air humming with flies; in a yellow cage on the bar a 
parrot squatted on its perch, all its feathers  drooping. Some old pictures of military 
scenes, covered with grime and cobwebs, adorne d the walls. On the tables, including that 
at which Rambert was sitting, bird-droppings were drying, and he was puzzled whence 
they came until, after some wing-flappings , a handsome cock came hopping out of his 
retreat in a dark corner. 
 Just then the heat seemed to rise seve ral degrees more. Cottard took off his coat 
and banged on the table-top. A very small ma n wearing a long blue apron that came 
nearly to his neck emerged from a doorway at the back, shouted a greeting to Cottard, 
and, vigorously kicking the cock out of his way, came up to the table. Raising his voice to 
drown the cock's indignant cacklings, he aske d what the gentlemen would like. Cottard 
ordered white wine and asked: "Where's Garc ia?" The dwarf replied that he'd not shown 
up at the cafe for several days.  "Think he'll come this evening?"  "Well, I ain't in his secrets, but you know when he usually comes, don't you?"  "Yes. Really, it's nothing very urgent; I only want him to know this friend of 
mine."  The barkeeper rubbed his moist hands on the front of his apron. 
 "Ah, so this gentleman's in business too?"  "Yes," Cottard said.  The little man made a snuffling noise.  "All right. Come back this eveni ng. I'll send the kid to warn him." 
 After they had left, Rambert asked what the business in question might be.  "Why, smuggling, of course. They get the stuff in past the sentries at the gates. There's plenty money in it." 
 "I see." Rambert paused for a moment, th en asked: "And, I take it, they've friends 
in court?" 
 "You've said it!"  In the evening the awning was rolled up, th e parrot squawking in its cage, and the 
small tables were surrounded by men in thei r shirt-sleeves. When Cottard entered, one 
man, with a white shirt gaping on a brick-red chest and a straw hat planted well back on 
his head, rose to his feet. He had a sun-ta nned face, regular features, small black eyes, 
very white teeth, and two or three rings  on his fingers. He looked about thirty. 
 "Hi!" he said to Cottard, ignoring Ra mbert. "Let's have one at the bar." 
 They drank three rounds in silence.  "How about a stroll ?" Garcia suggested. 
 They walked toward the harbor. Garcia asked what he was wanted to do. Cottard 
explained that it wasn't really for a deal  that he wanted to introduce his friend, M. 
Rambert, but only for what he called a "get-a way." Puffing at his cigarette, Garcia walked 
straight ahead. He asked some questions, always referring to Rambert as "he" and appearing not to notice his presence.  "Why does he want to go?"  "His wife is in France."  "Ah!" After a short pause he added: "What's his job?"  "He's a journalist."  "Is he, now? Journalists have long tongues." 
 "I told you he's a friend of  mine," Cottard replied. 
 They walked on in silence until they were near the wharves, which were now 
railed off. Then they turned in the directi on of a small tavern from which came a smell of 
fried sardines.  "In any case," Garcia said finally, "it' s not up my alley. Raoul's your man. And I'll 
have to get in touch with him. It's none too easy."  "That so?" Cottard sounded intere sted. "He's lying low, is he?" 
 Garcia made no answer. At the door of th e tavern he halted and for the first time 
addressed Rambert directly.  "The day after tomorrow, at eleven, at the corner of the customs barracks in the 
upper town." He made as if to go, then seemed to have an afterthought. "It's going to cost something, you know." He made the obser vation in a quite casual tone. 
 Rambert nodded. "Naturally."  On the way back the journalist thanked Cottard.  "Don't mention it, old chap. I'm only too glad to help you. And then, you're a journalist, I dare say you'll put in a word for me one day or another." 
 Two days later Rambert and Cottard climbe d the wide shadeless street leading to 
the upper part of the town. The barracks occupi ed by the customs officers had been partly 
transformed into a hospital, and a number of people were standing outside the main 
entrance, some of them  hoping to be allowed to visit a pa tient, a futile hope, since such 
visits were strictly prohibited, and others to glean some news of an invalid, news that in 
the course of an hour would have ceased to count. For these reasons  there were always a 
number of people and a certain amount of move ment at this spot, a fact that probably 
accounted for its choice by Garcia for his meeting with Rambert.  "It puzzles me," Cottard remarked, "why you're so keen on going. Really, what's 
happening here is extremely interesting." 
 "Not to me," Rambert replied.  "Well, yes, one's running some risks, I grant you. All the same, when you come to think of it, one ran quite as much risk in the old days crossing a busy street." 
 Just then Rieux's car drew up level with  them. Tarrou was at the wheel, and Rieux 
seemed half-asleep. He roused himself to make the introductions.  "We know each other," Tarrou said. "We're at  the same hotel." He then offered to 
drive Rambert back to the center.  "No, thanks. We've an appointment here."  Rieux looked hard at Rambert.  "Yes," Rambert said.  "What's that?" Cottard sounded su rprised. "The doctor knows about it?" 
 "There's the magistrate." Tarr ou gave Cottard a warning glance. 
 Cottard's look changed. M. Othon was st riding down the street toward them, 
briskly, yet with dignity. He took o ff his hat as he came up with them. 
 "Good morning, Monsieur Othon," said Tarrou.  The magistrate returned the greeting of the men in the car and, turning to Rambert 
and Cottard, who were in the background, gave them a quiet nod. Tarrou introduced Cottard and the journalist. The magistrate gazed at the sky for a moment, sighed, and 
remarked that these were indeed sad times.  "I've been told, Monsieur Tarrou," he continued, "that you are helping to enforce 
the prophylactic measures. I need hardly sa y how commendable that is, a fine example. 
Do you think, Dr. Rieux, that the epidemic will get worse?" 
 Rieux replied that one coul d only hope it wouldn't, and th e magistrate replied that 
one must never lose hope, the ways  of Providence were inscrutable. 
 Tarrou asked if his work had increased  as the result of present conditions. 
 "Quite the contrary. Crimin al cases of what we call th e first instance are growing 
rarer. In fact, almost my only work just now is holding inquiries into more serious 
breaches of the new regulations. Our ordinary laws have never been so well respected." 
 "That's because, by contrast, they necessarily appear good ones," Tarrou 
observed.  The magistrate, who seemed unable to take his gaze off the sky, abruptly dropped his mildly meditative ai r and stared at Tarrou. 
 "What does that matter? It's not the law that counts, it's the se ntence. And that is 
something we must all accept."  "That fellow," said Tarrou when the ma gistrate was out of hearing, "is Enemy 
Number One."  He pressed the starter.  Some minutes later Rambert and Cott ard saw Garcia approaching. Without 
making any sign of recognition he came strai ght up to them and, by way of greeting, said: 
"You'll have to wait a bit."  There was complete silence in the crowd around them, most of whom were 
women.  Nearly all were carrying parcels; they had the vain  hope of somehow smuggling 
these in to their sick relatives, and the even  crazier idea that the latter could eat the food 
they'd brought. The gate was guarded by armed sentries, and now and then an eerie cry 
resounded in the courtyard between the barrack  rooms and the entrance. Whenever this 
happened, anxious eyes turned toward the sick-wards.  The three men were watching the scen e when a brisk "Good morning" from 
behind them made them swing round. In spit e of the heat Raoul was wearing a well-cut 
dark suit and a felt hat with rolled-up brim. He  was tall and strongly built, his face rather 
pale. Hardly moving his lips, he  said quickly and clearly: 
 "Let's walk down to the cente r. You, Garcia, needn't come." 
 Garcia lit a cigarette and remained there while they walked away. Placing himself 
between Rambert and Cottard, Ra oul set the pace, a fast one. 
 "Garcia's explained the s ituation," he said. "We can fix it. But I must warn you 
it'll cost you a cool ten thousand."  Rambert said he agreed to these terms.  "Lunch with me tomorrow at the Sp anish restaurant near the docks." 
 Rambert said: "Right," and Raoul shook his hand, smiling for the first time.  After he had gone, Cottard said he wouldn't be able to come to lunch next day, as he had an engagement, but anyhow Rambert didn't need him any more.  When next day Rambert entered the Sp anish restaurant, everyone turned and 
stared at him. The dark, cellarlike room, belo w the level of the small yellow street, was 
patronized only by men, mostly Spaniards, j udging by their looks. Raoul was sitting at a 
table at the back of the room . Once he had beckoned to the j ournalist and Rambert started to go toward him, the curiosity left the faces  of others and they bent over their plates 
again. Raoul had beside him a tall, thin, ill- shaven man, with enormously wide shoulders, 
an equine face, and thinning hair. His shirtsleeves were rolled up, displaying long, skinny 
arms covered with black hair. When Ramber t was introduced he ga ve three slow nods. 
His own name, however, was not announced an d Raoul, when referring to him, always 
said "our friend."  "Our friend here thinks he may be able  to help you. He is going?" Raoul broke 
off, as the waitress had just come to take  Rambert's order. "He is going to put you in 
touch with two of our friends who will in troduce you to some sentries whom we've 
squared. But that doesn't mean you can start ri ght away. You'll have to leave it to the 
sentries to decide on the best moment. The si mplest thing will be for you to stay some 
nights with one of them; his home is quite near  the gate. The first th ing is for our friend 
here to give you the contacts needed; then when everything's set, you'll settle with him 
for the expenses."  Again the "friend" slowly moved his e quine head up and down, without ceasing to 
munch the tomato and pimento salad he wa s shoveling into his mouth. After which he 
began to speak, with a slight Spanish accent. He  asked Rambert to meet him, the next day 
but one, at eight in the morn ing, in the Cathedral porch. 
 "Another two days' wait," Rambert observed.  "It ain't so easy as all that, you see," Raoul said. "Them boys take some finding." 
 Horse-face nodded slow approval once more. Some time was spent looking for a subject of conversation. The problem wa s solved easily enough when Rambert 
discovered that horse-face was an ardent foot ball-player. He, too, had been very keen on 
soccer. They discussed the French champions hip, the merits of professional English 
teams, and the technique of passing. By the end of the meal horse-face was in high good humor, was calling Rambert "old boy," and tryi ng to convince him that the most sporting 
position by far on the football field was that  of center half. "You see, old boy, it's the 
center half that does the placing. And that's the whole art of the game, isn't it?" Rambert 
was inclined to agree, though he, personall y, had always played center forward. The 
discussion proceeded peacefully until a radio was turned on and, after at first emitting a series of sentimental songs, broke into the announcement that there had been a hundred and thirty-seven plague deaths on the previ ous day. No one present betrayed the least 
emotion. Horse-face merely shrugged and stood up.  Raoul and Rambert followed his example.  As they were going out, the center ha lf shook Rambert's hand vigorously. "My 
name's Gonzales," he said.  To Rambert the next two days seemed endless. He looked up Rieux and described 
to him the latest developments, then accomp anied the doctor on one of his calls. He took 
leave of him on the doorstep of a house where a patient, suspected to have plague, was 
awaiting him. There was a sound of footsteps and voices in the hall; the family were 
being warned of the doctor's visit.  "I hope Tarrou will be on time," Rieux murmured. He looked worn out.  "Is the epidemic getting out of hand?" Rambert asked.  Rieux said it wasn't that; indeed, th e death-graph was risi ng less steeply. Only 
they lacked adequate means of coping with the disease.  "We're short of equipment. In all the ar mies of the world a shortage of equipment 
is usually compensated for by manpower.  But we're short of man-power, too." 
 "Haven't doctors and trained assist ants been sent from other towns?" 
 "Yes," Rieux said. "Ten doctors and a hundred helpers. That sounds a lot, no 
doubt. But it's barely enough to cope with the present state of affairs. And it will be quite 
inadequate if things get worse."  Rambert, who had been listening to the sounds within the house, turned to Rieux 
with a friendly smile.  "Yes," he said, "you'd better make hast e to win your battle." Then a shadow 
crossed his face. "You know," he added in a low tone: "it's not because of that I'm leaving."  Rieux replied that he knew it very well, but Rambert went on to say:  "I don't think I'm a coward, not as a rule, anyhow. And I've had opportunities of 
putting it to the test. Only there are some thoughts I simply cannot endure." 
 The doctor looked him in the eyes.  "You'll see her again," he said.  "Maybe. But I just can't stomach the thought  that it may last on and on, and all the 
time she'll be growing older. At thirty one's beginning to age, and one's got to squeeze all 
one can out of life. But I doubt if you can understand." 
 Rieux was replying that he thought he could, when Tarrou came up, obviously much excited.  "I've just asked Paneloux to join us."  "Well?" asked the doctor.  "He thought it over, then said yes." 
 "That's good," the doctor said. "I'm glad to know he's better than his sermon." 
 "Most people are like that ," Tarrou replied. "It's only a matter of giving them the 
chance." He smiled and winked at Rieux. "That' s my job in life, giving people chances." 
 "Excuse me," Rambert said, "I've got to be off."  On Thursday, the day of the appointment, Rambert entered the Cathedral porch at five minutes to eight. The air was still relatively cool. Small fleecy clouds, which 
presently the sun would swallow at a gulp, we re drifting across the sky. A faint smell of 
moisture rose from the lawns, parched though they were. Still masked by the eastward houses, the sun was warming up Joan of Arc's helmet only, and it made a solitary patch of brightness in the Cathedral square. A cl ock struck eight. Rambert took some steps in 
the empty porch. From inside came a low s ound of intoning voices, together with stale 
wafts of incense and dank air.  Then the voices ceased. Ten small black  forms came out of the building and 
hastened away toward the center of the tow n. Rambert grew impatient. Other black forms 
climbed the steps and entered the porch. He wa s about to light a ciga rette when it struck 
him that smoking might be frowned on here.  At eight fifteen the organ began to play, very softly. Rambert entered. At first he 
could see nothing in the dim light  of the aisle; after a moment he made out in the nave the 
small black forms that had preceded him. They were all grouped in a corner, in front of a 
makeshift altar on which stood a statue of St . Roch, carved in haste by one of our local 
sculptors. Kneeling, they looked even smalle r than before, blobs of clotted darkness hardly more opaque than the gray, smoky haze in which they seemed to float. Above 
them the organ was playing endless variations. 
 When Rambert stepped out of the Cathedral, he saw Gonzales already going down the steps on his way back to the town.  "I thought you'd cleared off, old boy," he said to the journalis t. "Considering how 
late it is."  He proceeded to explain that he'd gone to meet his friends at the place agreed on, which was quite near by, at ten to eight, th e time they'd fixed, and waited twenty minutes 
without seeing them.  "Something must have held them up. There's lots of snags, you know, in our line of business."  He suggested another meeting at the same time on the following day, beside the war memorial. Rambert sighed and pushed his hat back on his head.  "Don't take it so hard," Gonzales laug hed. "Why, think of all the swerves and runs 
and passes you got to make to score a goal."  "Quite so," Rambert agreed. "But th e game lasts only an hour and a half." 
 The war memorial at Oran stands at th e one place where one has a glimpse of the 
sea, a sort of esplanade following for a shor t distance the brow of the cliff overlooking 
the harbor. Next day, being agai n the first to arrive at the meeting-place, Rambert whiled 
away the time reading the list of names of those who had died for their country. Some 
minutes later two men strolled up, gave him a casual glance, then, resting their elbows on 
the parapet of the esplanade, gazed down inte ntly at the empty, lifeless harbor. Both wore 
short-sleeved jerseys and blue trousers, and were of much th e same height. The journalist 
moved away and, seated on a stone bench, studie d their appearance at leisure. They were 
obviously youngsters, not more than twenty. Just then he saw Gonzales coming up.  "Those are our friends," he said, after apologizing for being late. Then he led 
Rambert to the two youths, whom he introduced  as Marcel and Louis. They looked so 
much alike that Rambert had no doubt they were brothers.  "Right," said Gonzales. "Now you know each other, you can get down to business."  Marcel, or Louis, said that  their turn of guard duty began in two days and lasted a 
week; they'd have to watch out for the night when there was the best chance of bringing it 
off. The trouble was that there were two other sentries, regular soldiers, besides themselves, at the west gate. These two men had better be kept out of the business; one 
couldn't depend on them, and anyhow it would pile up expenses unnecessarily. Some evenings, however, these two sentries spent several hours in the back room of a near-by 
bar. Marcel, or Louis, said th at the best thing Rambert could do would be to stay at their 
place, which was only a few minutes' walk from  the gate, and wait till one of them came 
to tell him the coast was clear. It should th en be quite easy for him to "make his get-
away."  But there was no time to lose; there had been talk about setting up duplicate 
sentry posts a little farther out.  Rambert agreed and handed some of his few remaining cigarettes to the young men.  The one who had not yet spoken asked Gonzales if the question of expenses had been settled and whether an advance would be given.  "No," Gonzales said, "and you needn't bot her about that; he's a pal of mine. 
 He'll pay when he leaves." 
 Another meeting was arranged. Gonzales suggested their dining together on the 
next day but one, at the Spanish restaurant. It was at easy walking-distance from where 
the young men lived. "For the first night," he added, "I'll keep you company, old boy." 
 Next day on his way to his bedroom Ra mbert met Tarrou coming down the stairs 
at the hotel.  "Like to come with me?" he as ked. "I'm just off to see Rieux." 
 Rambert hesitated.  "Well, I never feel sure I'm not disturbing him."  "I don't think you need worry about that ; he's talked about you quite a lot." 
 The journalist pondered. Then, "Look here," he said. "If you've any time to spare after dinner, never mind how late, why not co me to the hotel, both of you, and have a 
drink with me?"  "That will depend on Rieux." Tarrou s ounded doubtful. "And on the plague," said 
Tarrou.  At eleven o'clock that night, however, Rieux and Tarrou entered the small, narrow bar of the hotel. Some thirty people were cr owded into it, all talki ng at the top of their 
voices. Coming from the silence of the pl ague-bound town, the two newcomers were 
startled by the sudden burst of noise, and ha lted in the doorway. They understood the 
reason for it when they saw that liquor wa s still to be had here. Rambert, who was 
perched on a stool at a corner of the bar, beckoned to them. With complete coolness he elbowed away a noisy customer beside him to make room for his friends. 
 "You've no objection to a s pot of something strong?" 
 "No," Tarrou replied. "Q uite the contrary." 
 Rieux sniffed the pungency of bitter herbs in the drink that Rambert handed him. 
 It was hard to make oneself heard in  the din of voices, but Rambert seemed 
chiefly concerned with drinking. The doctor couldn't make up his mind whether he was 
drunk yet. At one of the two tables that o ccupied all the remaining space beyond the half-
circle round the bar, a naval o fficer, with a girl on each side  of him, was describing to a 
fat, red-faced man a typhus epidemic at Cairo. "They had camps, you know," he was 
saying, "for the natives, with te nts for the sick ones and a ri ng of sentries all round. If a 
member of the family came along and tried to smuggle in one of those damn-fool native remedies, they fired at sight.  A bit tough, I grant you, but it was the only thing to do." At th e other table, round 
which sat a bevy of bright young people, the ta lk was incomprehensible, half drowned by 
the stridence of St. James Infirmary coming fr om a loud-speaker just above their heads. 
 "Any luck?" Rieux had to raise his voice.  "I'm getting on," Rambert replied. "In the course of the week, perhaps." 
 "A pity!" Tarrou shouted.  "Why?"  "Oh," Rieux put in, "Tarrou said that becau se he thinks you might be useful to us 
here. But, personally, I understand your wish to get away only too well."  Tarrou stood the next round of drinks.  Rambert got off his stool and looked him in the eyes for the first time.  "How could I be useful?"  "Why, of course," Tarrou replied, slowly r eaching toward his glass, "in one of our 
sanitary squads." 
 The look of brooding obstinacy that Ramber t so often had came back to his face, 
and he climbed again on to his stool.  "Don't you think these squads of ours do any good?" asked Tarrou, who had just taken a sip of his glass and was gazing hard at Rambert.  "I'm sure they do," the journalist  replied, and drank off his glass. 
 Rieux noticed that his hand was shaking, and he decided, defini tely, that the man 
was far gone in drink.  Next day, when for the second time Rambert entered the Spanish restaurant, he had to make his way through a group of men who had taken chairs out on the sidewalk 
and were sitting in the green- gold evening light, enj oying the first breaths of cooler air. 
They were smoking an acrid-smelling tobacco. The restaurant itself was almost empty. Rambert went to the table at the back at which Gonzales had sat when they met for the first time. He told the waitress he w ould wait a bit. It was seven thirty. 
 In twos and threes the men from outside began to dribble in and seat themselves 
at the tables. The waitresses started serving them, and a tinkle of knives and forks, a hum 
of conversation, began to fill the cellarlike room. At eight Rambert was still waiting. The lights were turned on. A new set of people took the other chairs at hi s table. He ordered 
dinner. At half past eight he had finished w ithout having seen either Gonzales or the two 
young men.  He smoked several cigarettes. The rest aurant was gradually emptying. Outside, 
night was falling rapidly. Th e curtains hung across the doorway were billowing in a 
warm breeze from the sea. At nine Rambert re alized that the restau rant was quite empty 
and the waitress was eying him curiously. He paid, went out, and, noticing that a cafe 
across the street was open, settled down there at a place from which he could keep an eye 
on the entrance of the restaurant. At half past  nine he walked slowly back to his hotel, 
racking his brains for some method of tracki ng down Gonzales, whose address he did not 
know, and bitterly discouraged by the not unl ikely prospect of having to start the 
tiresome business all over again.  It was at this moment, as he walked in the dark streets along which ambulances were speeding, that it suddenly st ruck him, as he informed Dr. Rieux subsequently, that 
all this time he'd practically forgotten the wo man he loved, so absorbed had he been in 
trying to find a rift in the walls that cut him off from her. But at this same moment, now that once more all ways of escape were seal ed against him, he felt his longing for her 
blaze up again, with a violence so sudden, so intens e, that he started running to his hotel, 
as if to escape the burning pain that none the less pervaded him, racing like wildfire in his blood.  Very early next day, however, he calle d on Rieux, to ask him where he could find 
Cottard.  "The only thing to do is to pick up the thread again where I dropped it."  "Come tomorrow night," Rieux said. "Tarr ou asked me to invite Cottard here, I 
don't know why. He's due to come at  ten. Come at half past ten." 
 When Cottard visited the doctor next da y, Tarrou and Rieux were discussing the 
case of one of Rieux's patients who against all expecta tion had recovered. 
 "It was ten to one against," Ta rrou commented. "He was in luck."  "Oh, come now," Cottard said. "It can't have been plague, that's all." 
 They assured him there was no doubt it was a case of plague.  "That's impossible, since he recovere d. You know as well as I do, once you have 
plague your number's up."  "True enough, as a general rule," Rieux re plied. "But if you refuse to be beaten, 
you have some pleasant surprises."  Cottard laughed.  "Precious few, anyhow. You saw the number of deaths this evening?" 
 Tarrou, who was gazing amiably at Cottar d, said he knew the latest figures, and 
that the position was extremely serious. But wh at did that prove? Only that still more 
stringent measures should be applied.  "How? You can't make more stringe nt ones than those we have now." 
 "No. But every person in the town must apply them to himself."  Cottard stared at him in a puzzled manne r, and Tarrou went on to say that there 
were far too many slackers, that this pl ague was everybody's business, and everyone 
should do his duty. For instance, any able- bodied man was welcome in the sanitary 
squads.  "That's an idea," said Cottard, "but it won't get you anywhere. The plague has the 
whip hand of you and there's nothing to be done about it."  "We shall know whether that is so", Tarrou's voice was carefully controlled, "only when we've tried everything."  Meanwhile Rieux had been sitting at hi s desk, copying out reports. Tarrou was 
still gazing at the little business man, w ho was stirring uneasily in his chair. 
 "Look here, Monsieur Cottard, why don't you join us?"  Picking up his derby hat, Cottard rose fr om his chair with an offended expression. 
 "It's not my job," he said. Then, with an  air of bravado, he added: "What's more, 
the plague suits me quite well and I see no reason why I should bother about trying to 
stop it."  As if a new idea had just waylai d him, Tarrou struck his forehead. 
 "Why, of course, I was forgetting. If it wasn't for that, you'd be arrested." 
 Cottard gave a start and gripped the back of  the chair, as if he were about to fall. 
Rieux had stopped writing and was obs erving him with grave interest. 
 "Who told you that?" Cottard almost screamed.  "Why, you yourself!" Tarrou looked surprise d. "At least, that's what the doctor 
and I have gathered from the way you speak."  Losing all control of himself, Co ttard let out a volley of oaths. 
 "Don't get excited," Tarrou said quietly. "N either I nor the doct or would dream of 
reporting you to the police. What you may have done is no business of ours. 
 And, anyway, we've never had much use for the police. Come, now! Sit down again."  Cottard looked at the chair, then hesitantly lowered himself into it. He heaved a deep sigh.  "It's something that happened ages ago," he began. "Somehow they've dug it up. I thought it had all been forgotten. But somebody started talking, damn him! They sent for me and told me not to budge till the inquiry was finished. And I felt pretty sure they'd end up by arresting me."  "Was it anything serious?" Tarrou asked. 
 "That depends on what you mean by 'ser ious.' It wasn't murder, anyhow." 
 "Prison or transporta tion with hard labor?" 
 Cottard was looking almost abject.  "Well, prison, if I'm lucky." But after a moment he grew excited again. "It was all 
a mistake. Everybody makes mistakes. And I can't bear the idea of being pulled in for that, of being torn from my home  and habits and everyone I know." 
 "And is that the reason," Tarrou aske d, "why you had the bright idea of hanging 
yourself?"  "Yes. It was a damn-fool thing to do, I admit."  For the first time Rieux spoke. He told  Cottard that he quite understood his 
anxiety, but perhaps everything would come right in the end. 
 "Oh, for the moment I've nothing to fear."  "I can see," Tarrou said, "that you're  not going to join in our effort." 
 Twiddling his hat uneasily, Cottard gazed at Tarrou with shifty eyes. 
 "I hope you won't bear me a grudge."  "Certainly not. But", Tarrou smiled, "do try at least not to propagate the microbe deliberately."  Cottard protested that he'd never wanted the plague, it was pure chance that it had 
broken out, and he wasn't to blame if it happe ned to make things easier for him just now. 
Then he seemed to pluck up courage agai n and when Rambert entered was shouting 
almost aggressively:  "What's more, I'm pretty sure you won't get anywhere."  Rambert learned to his chagrin that Cottard didn't know where Gonzales lived; he suggested that they'd better pay another visit to the small cafe. They made an 
appointment for the following day. When Rieux gave him to understand that he'd like to 
be kept posted, Rambert proposed that he a nd Tarrou should look him up one night at the 
end of the week. They could come as late as they liked and would be sure to find him in 
his room.  Next morning Cottard and Rambert went to the cafe and left a message for Garcia, asking him to come that evening, or if  this could not be ma naged, next day. They 
waited for him in vain that evening. Next day Garcia turned up. He listened in silence to 
what Rambert had to say; then informed  him he had no idea what had happened, but 
knew that several districts of the town ha d been isolated for twenty-four hours for a 
house-to-house inspection. Quite possibly G onzales and the two youngsters hadn't been 
able to get through the cordon. All he could do was to put them in touch once more with Raoul. Naturally this couldn't be done before the next day but one.  "I see," Rambert said. "I'll have to start it all over again, from scratch." 
 On the next day but one, Raoul, whom Ra mbert met at a street corner, confirmed 
Garcia's surmise; the low-lying districts had, in fact, been isolated  and a cordon put round 
them. The next thing was to get in contact with Gonzales. Two days later Rambert was lunching with the footballer.  "It's too damn silly," Gonzales said. "Of course you should have arranged some 
way of seeing each other."  Rambert heartily agreed.  "Tomorrow morning," Gonzales continued, "we'll look up the kids and try to get a 
real move on." 
 When they called next day, however, the youngsters were out. A note was left 
fixing a meeting for the following day at noon, outside the high school. When Rambert 
came back to his hotel, Tarrou wa s struck by the look on his face. 
 "Not feeling well?" he asked.  "It's having to start it all over again that's got me down." Then he added: 
 "You'll come tonight, won't you?"  When the two friends entered Rambert's room that night, they found him lying on 
the bed. He got up at once and filled the glasses he had read y. Before lifting his to his 
lips, Rieux asked him if he was making progress.  The journalist replied that he'd started 
the same round again and got to the same point as before; in a day or two he was to have 
his last appointment. Then he took a sip of his drink and adde d gloomily: "Needless to 
say, they won't turn up."  "Oh come! That doesn't follow b ecause they let you down last time." 
 "So you haven't understood yet?" Rambert shrugged his shoulders almost scornfully.  "Understood what?"  "The plague."  "Ah!" Rieux exclaimed.  "No, you haven't understood that it means exactly that, the same thing over and over and over again."  He went to a corner of the room and started a small phonograph. 
 "What's that record?" Tarrou asked. "I've heard it before." 
 "It's St. James Infirmary."  While the phonograph was playing, tw o shots rang out in the distance. 
 "A dog or a get-away," Tarrou remarked.  When, a moment later, the record en ded, an ambulance bell could be heard 
clanging past under the window and receding into silence.  "Rather a boring record," Ra mbert remarked. "And this must be the tenth time I've 
put it on today."  "Are you really so fond of it?"  "No, but it's the only one I have." And af ter a moment he added: "That's what I 
said 'it' was, the same thing over and over again."  He asked Rieux how the sanitary groups were functioning. Five teams were now at work, and it was hoped to form others. Sit ting on the bed, the journalist seemed to be 
studying his fingernails. Rieux was gazing at his squat, powerfully built form, hunched 
up on the edge of the bed.  Suddenly he realized that Ra mbert was returning his gaze. 
 "You know, doctor, I've given a lot of thought to your campaign. And if I'm not 
with you, I have my reasons. No, I don't think it's that I'm afraid to risk my skin again. I 
took part in the Spanish Civil War."  "On which side?" Tarrou asked.  "The losing side. But since then  I've done a bit of thinking." 
 "About what?"  "Courage. I know now that man is capable of great deeds. But if he isn't capable 
of a great emotion, well, he leaves me cold." 
 "One has the idea that he is capab le of everything," Tarrou remarked. 
 "I can't agree; he's incapable of suffering for a long time, or being happy for a long time. Which means that he's incapable of  anything really worth while." He looked at 
the two men in turn, then asked: "Tell me, Tarrou, are you capable of dying for love?" 
 "I couldn't say, but I hardly think so, as I am now."  "You see. But you're capable of dying for an idea; one can see that right away. 
 Well, personally, I've seen enough of peopl e who die for an idea. I don't believe in 
heroism; I know it's easy and I've learned it can be murderous. What interests me is living 
and dying for what one loves."  Rieux had been watching the journalist attentively. With his eyes still on him he 
said quietly:  "Man isn't an idea, Rambert."  Rambert sprang off the bed, his face ablaze with passion.  "Man is an idea, and a precious small idea, once he turns his back on love. And 
that's my point; we, mankind, have lost the capacity for love. We must face that fact, 
doctor. Let's wait to acquire that capacity  or, if really it's beyond us, wait for the 
deliverance that will come to each of us anyw ay, without his playing the hero. Personally, 
I look no farther."  Rieux rose. He suddenly appeared very tired.  "You're right, Rambert, quite right, and for nothing in the world would I try to 
dissuade you from what you're going to do; it seems to me absolutely right and proper. 
However, there's one thing I must tell you: ther e's no question of heroism in all this. It's a 
matter of common decency. That's an idea wh ich may make some people smile, but the 
only means of righting a pl ague is, common decency." 
 "What do you mean by 'common decency'?" Rambert's tone was grave.  "I don't know what it means for other people. But in my case I know that it consists in doing my job."  "Your job! I only wish I we re sure what my job is!" There was a mordant edge to 
Rambert's voice. "Maybe I'm all wrong in putting love first."  Rieux looked him in the eyes.  "No," he said vehemently, "you are not wrong."  Rambert gazed thoughtfully at them.  "You two," he said, "I suppose you've nothing to lose in all this. It's easier, that 
way, to be on the side of the angels."  Rieux drained his glass.  "Come along," he said to Tarrou. "We've work to do."  He went out.  Tarrou followed, but seemed to change his mind when he reached the door. He stopped and looked at  the journalist. 
 "I suppose you don't know that Rieux's wife  is in a sanatorium, a hundred miles or 
so away."  Rambert showed surprise and began to sa y something; but Tarrou had already left 
the room.  At a very early hour next day Rambert rang up the doctor.  "Would you agree to my working with you until I find some way of getting out of 
the town?"  There was a moment's silence before the reply came.  "Certainly, Rambert. Thanks."   PART III  Thus week by week the prisoners of plague put up what fight they could. Some, like Rambert, even contrived to fancy they were  still behaving as free men and had the power 
of choice. But actually it would have been true r to say that by this time, mid-August, the 
plague had swallowed up everything and ev eryone. No longer were there individual 
destinies; only a collective destiny, made of plague and the emotions shared by all. 
Strongest of these emotions was the sense of exile and of depr ivation, with all the 
crosscurrents of revolt and fear set up by thes e. That is why the na rrator thinks this 
moment, registering the climax of the summ er heat and the disease, the best for 
describing, on general lines and by way of illu stration, the excesses of the living, burials 
of the dead, and the plig ht of parted lovers. 
 It was at this time that a high wind ro se and blew for several days through the 
plague-stricken city. Wind is particularly dr eaded by the inhabitants of Oran, since the 
plateau on which the town is built presents  no natural obstacle, and it can sweep our 
streets with unimpeded violence. During the months when not a drop of rain had refreshed the town, a gray crust had formed  on everything, and this flaked off under the 
wind, disintegrating into dust- clouds. What with the dust and scraps of paper whirled 
against peoples' legs, the streets grew emp tier. Those few who went out could be seen 
hurrying along, bent forward, with handkerchief s or their hands pressed to their mouths. 
At nightfall, instead of the usual throng of pe ople, each trying to prolong a day that might 
well be his last, you met only small groups hast ening home or to a favorite cafe. With the 
result that for several days when twilight cam e, it fell much quicker at this time of the 
year, the streets were almost empty, and si lent but for the long-drawn stridence of the 
wind. A smell of brine and seaweed came from  the unseen, storm-tossed sea. And in the 
growing darkness the almost empty town, palle d in dust, swept by bitter sea-spray, and 
loud with the shrilling of the wind, se emed a lost island of the damned. 
 Hitherto the plague had found far more victims in the more thickly populated and 
less well-appointed outer distri cts than in the heart of the town. Quite suddenly, however, 
it launched a new attack and established itsel f in the business cent er. Residents accused 
the wind of carrying infection, "broadcasti ng germs," as the hotel manager put it. 
Whatever the reason might be, people living in th e central districts realized that their turn 
had come when each night they heard oftener and oftener the ambulances clanging past, sounding the plague's dismal, passionless tocsin under their windows.  The authorities had the idea of segregati ng certain particularly affected central 
areas and permitting only those whose services were indispensable to cross the cordon. 
Dwellers in these districts could not help regarding these regu lations as a sort of taboo 
specially directed at themselves, and thus they came, by contrast, to envy residents in other areas their freedom. And the latter, to cheer themselves up in despondent moments, fell to picturing the lot of those others less free than themselves. "Anyhow, there are 
some worse off than I," was a remark that voiced the only solace to be had in those days. 
 About the same time we had a recrudescence of outbreaks of fire, especially in the 
residential area near the west  gate. It was found, after i nquiry, that people who had 
returned from quarantine were responsible for these fires. Thrown off their balance by bereavement and anxiety, they were burning their houses under the odd delusion that they 
were killing off the plague in the holocaust.  Great difficulty was experienced in fi ghting these fires, whose numbers and 
frequency exposed whole districts to consta nt danger, owing to the high wind. When the 
attempts made by the authorities to convin ce these well-meaning incendiaries that the 
official fumigation of their houses effectively removed any risk of infection had proved 
unavailing, it became necessary to decree very heavy penalties for this type of arson. And 
most likely it was not the pr ospect of mere imprisonment  that deterred these unhappy 
people, but the common belief th at a sentence of imprisonment was tantamount to a death 
sentence, owing to the very high mortality prevai ling in the town jail. It must be admitted 
that there was some foundation for this beli ef. It seemed that, for obvious reasons, the 
plague launched its most virulent attacks on those who lived, by choice or by necessity, 
in groups: soldiers, prisoners, monks, a nd nuns. For though some prisoners are kept 
solitary, a prison forms a sort of community, as is proved by the fact that in our town jail the guards died of plague in the same propor tion as the prisoners. The plague was no 
respecter of persons and under its despotic rule everyone, from the warden down to the 
humblest delinquent, was under sentence and, perhaps for the first time, impartial justice reigned in the prison.  Attempts made by the authorities to re dress this leveling-out by some sort of 
hierarchy?the idea was to confer a decoration on  guards who died in the exercise of their 
duties, came to nothing. Since martial law had been declared and the guards might, from 
a certain angle, be regarded as on active service, they were awarded posthumously the military medal. But though the prisoners raised  no protest, strong exception was taken in 
military circles, and it was pointed out, logically enough, that a most regrettable confusion in the public mind would certainly ensue. The civil authority conceded the 
point and decided that the simplest solution was to bestow on guards who died at their 
post a "plague medal." Even so, since as regards the first recipients of the military medal the harm had been done and there was no que stion of withdrawing the decoration from 
them, the military were still dissatisfi ed. Moreover, the plague medal had the 
disadvantage of having far less moral effect than that attaching to a military award, since in time of pestilence a decoration of this  sort is too easily acquired. Thus nobody was 
satisfied.  Another difficulty was that the jail admi nistration could not follow the procedure 
adopted by the religious and, in a less degree,  the military authorities. The monks in the 
two monasteries of the town had been ev acuated and lodged for the time being with 
religious-minded families. In the same way, whenever possible, small bodies of men had been moved out of barracks and billeted in sc hools or public buildings. Thus the disease, 
which apparently had forced on us the solidar ity of a beleaguered to wn, disrupted at the 
same time longestablished communities and sent men out to live, as individuals, in relative isolation. This, too, added to  the general feeling of unrest.  Indeed, it can easily be imagined that these changes, combined with the high 
wind, also had an incendiary effect on certain  minds. There were frequent attacks on the 
gates of the town, and the men who made them now were armed. 
 Shots were exchanged, there were casualt ies, and some few got away. Then the 
sentry posts were reinforced, and such atte mpts quickly ceased. None the less, they 
sufficed to start a wave of revolutionary vi olence, though only on a small scale. Houses 
that had been burnt or closed by the sanitary control were looted. However, it seemed unlikely that these excesses were premeditated. Usually it was some chance incentive that led normally well-behaved people to acts whic h promptly had their imitators. Thus you 
sometimes saw a man, acting on some crazy im pulse, dash into a blazing house under the 
eyes of its owner, who was standing by, dazed  with grief, watching the flames. Seeing his 
indifference, many of the onlookers would fo llow the lead given by the first man, and 
presently the dark street was full of running men, changed to hunched, misshapen 
gnomes by the flickering glow from the dying fl ames and the ornaments or furniture they 
carried on their shoulders.  It was incidents of this sort that compelled the authorities to declare martial law and enforce the regulations deriving from it. Two looters were shot, but we may doubt if 
this made much impression on the others; wi th so many deaths taking place every day, 
these two executions went unheeded, a mere drop in the ocean.  Actually scenes of this kind continued to take place fairly often, without the 
authorities' making even a show  of intervening. The only regu lation that seemed to have 
some effect on the populace was the establis hment of a curfew hour. From eleven 
onwards, plunged in complete darkness, Oran seemed a huge necropolis.  On moonlight nights the long, straight streets and dirty white walls, nowhere 
darkened by the shadow of a tree, their peace untroubled by footsteps or a dog's bark, 
glimmered in pale recession. The silent city was no more than an assemblage of huge, 
inert cubes, between which only the mute effi gies of great men, carapaced in bronze, with 
their blank stone or metal faces, conjured up a sorry semblance of what the man had been. In lifeless squares and avenues these ta wdry idols lorded it under the lowering sky; 
stolid monsters that might have personified  the rule of immobility imposed on us, or, 
anyhow, its final aspect, that of a defunct ci ty in which plague, stone, and darkness had 
effectively silenced every voice.  But there was darkness also in men's hear ts, and the true fact s were as little 
calculated to reassure our townsfolk as the wild storie s going round about the burials. The 
narrator cannot help talking about  these burials, and a word of excuse is here in place. For 
he is well aware of the reproach that might be  made him in this respect; his justification is 
that funerals were taking place throughout th is period and, in a way, he was compelled, as 
indeed everybody was compelled, to give heed  to them. In any case it should not be 
assumed that he has a morbid taste for such  ceremonies; quite the contrary, he much 
prefers the society of the living and, to give  a concrete illustrati on, sea-bathing. But the 
bathing-beaches were out of bounds and the co mpany of the living ran a risk, increasing 
as the days went by, of being perforce converted  into the company of the dead. That was, 
indeed, self-evident. True, one could always re fuse to face this disagreeable fact, shut 
one's eyes to it, or thrust it out of mind, but th ere is a terrible cogenc y in the self-evident; 
ultimately it breaks down all defenses. How, for instance, continue to ignore the funerals 
on the day when somebody you loved needed one?  Actually the most striking feature of our funerals was their speed. Formalities had 
been whittled down, and, generally speaking, all elaborate cerem onial suppressed. The 
plague victim died away from his family a nd the customary vigil beside the dead body 
was forbidden, with the result that a person dying in the evening spent the night alone, 
and those who died in the daytime were prom ptly buried. Needless to say, the family was 
notified, but in most cases, since the deceased had lived with them, its members were in 
quarantine and thus immobilized. When, howev er, the deceased had not lived with his 
family, they were asked to atte nd at a fixed time; after, that  is to say, the body had been 
washed and put in the coffin and when the jo urney to the cemetery was about to begin. 
 Let us suppose that these formalities were taking place at the auxiliary hospital of which Dr. Rieux was in charge. This converted school had an exit at the back of the main 
building. A large storeroom giving on the corrid or contained the coffins. On arrival, the 
family found a coffin already nailed up in th e corridor. Then came the most important 
part of the business: the signing of official  forms by the head of the family. Next the 
coffin was loaded on a motor-vehicle, a real hearse or a large converted ambulance. The 
mourners stepped into one of the few taxis still allowed to ply and the vehicles drove 
hell-for-leather to the cemetery by a route avoiding the center of the town. There was a 
halt at the gate, where police officers applied a rubber stamp to the official exit permit, 
without which it was impossible for our citizens to have what  they called a last resting-
place. The policeman stood back and the cars  drew up near a plot of ground where a 
number of graves stood open, waiting for inmate s. A priest came to meet the mourners, 
since church services at funerals were now  prohibited. To an accompaniment of prayers 
the coffin was dragged from the hearse, roped up, and carried to the graveside; the ropes 
were slipped and it came heavily to rest at  the bottom of the grave. No sooner had the 
priest begun to sprinkle holy water than  the first sod rebounded from the lid. The 
ambulance had already left and was being spra yed with disinfectant, and while spadefuls 
of clay thudded more and more dully on th e rising layer of earth, the family were 
bundling into the taxi. A quarter of an hour later they were back at home.  The whole process was put through with the maximum of speed and the minimum of risk. It cannot be denied that, anyhow in the early days , the natural feelings of the 
family were somewhat outraged by these li ghtning funerals. But obviously in time of 
plague such sentiments can't be taken into ac count, and all was sacrificed to efficiency. 
And though, to start with, the morale of the population was shaken by this summary 
procedure, for the desire to have a "proper f uneral" is more widespread than is generally 
believed, as time went on, fortunately enough, th e food problem became more urgent and 
the thoughts of our townsfolk were diverted to more instant needs. So much energy was 
expended on filling up forms, hunting round fo r supplies, and lining up that people had 
no time to think of the manner in which others were dying around them and they themselves would die one day. Thus the growing complications of our everyday life, which might have been an affliction, proved to  be a blessing in disguise. Indeed, had not 
the epidemic, as already mentioned, spread its ravages, all would have been for the best. 
 For then coffins became scarcer; also th ere was a shortage of winding-sheets, and 
of space in the cemetery. Something had to be done about this, and one obvious step, justified by its practical convenience, was to combine funerals and, when necessary, multiply the trips between the hospital and the burial-place.  At one moment the stock of coffins in Rieux's hospital was reduced to five. Once 
filled, all five were loaded together in the ambulance. At the cemetery they were emptied 
out and the iron-gray corpses put  on stretchers and deposited in  a shed reserved for that 
purpose, to wait their turn. Meanwhile the empty coffins, after being sprayed with 
antiseptic fluid, were rushed back  to the hospital, and the pro cess was repeated as often as 
necessary. This system worked  excellently and won the approval of the Prefect. He even 
told Rieux that it was really a great improve ment on the death-carts driven by Negroes of 
which one reads in accounts of fo rmer visitations of this sort. 
 "Yes," Rieux said. "And though the burials are much th e same, we keep careful 
records of them. That, you will agree, is progress."  Successful, however, as the system proved itself in practice, there was something 
so distasteful in the last rites as now performed that the Prefect felt constrained to forbid relations of the deceased being present at th e actual interment. They were allowed to 
come only as far as the cemetery gates, and even that was not authorized officially. For 
things had somewhat changed as regards th e last stage of the ceremony. In a patch of 
open ground dotted with lentiscu s trees at the far end of th e cemetery, two big pits had 
been dug. One was reserved for the men, the ot her for the women. Thus, in this respect, 
the authorities still gave thought to propriety  and it was only later that, by the force of 
things, this last remnant of decorum went  by the board, and men and women were flung 
into the death-pits indiscriminately. Happil y, this ultimate indignity synchronized with 
the plague's last ravages.  In the period we are now concerned wit h, the separation of the sexes was still in 
force and the authorities set great store by it . At the bottom of each pit a deep layer of 
quicklime steamed and seethed. On the lips of  the pit a low ridge of quicklime threw up 
bubbles that burst in the air above it. When the ambulance ha d finished its trips, the 
stretchers were carried to the pits in Indian file. 
 The naked, somewhat contorted bodies were  slid off into the pit almost side by 
side, then covered with a la yer of quicklime and another of  earth, the latter only a few 
inches deep, so as to leave space for subse quent consignments. On the following day the 
next of kin were asked to si gn the register of burials, whic h showed the distinction that 
can be made between men and, for example, dogs; men's deaths are checked and entered 
up. 
 Obviously all these activities called for a considerable staff, and Rieux was often 
on the brink of a shortage. Many of the grav ediggers, stretcher-bearers, and the like, 
public servants to begin with, and later volunt eers, died of plague. However stringent the 
precautions, sooner or later contagion did its wo rk. Still, when all is said and done, the 
really amazing thing is that, so long as the ep idemic lasted, there was never any lack of 
men for these duties. The critical moment came just before the outbreak touched high-water mark, and the doctor had good reason for feeling anxious. There was then a real 
shortage of man-power both for the higher pos ts and for the rough work, as Rieux called 
it. But, paradoxically enough, once th e whole town was in the grip  of the disease, its very 
prevalence tended to make things easier, since the disorganization of the town's economic life threw a great number of persons out of wo rk. Few of the workers thus made available 
were qualified for administrative posts, but  the recruiting of me n for the "rough work" 
became much easier. From now on, indeed, pove rty showed itself a stronger stimulus 
than fear, especially as, owi ng to its risks, such work was highly paid. The sanitary authorities always had a waiting-list of applicants for work; whenever there was a 
vacancy the men at the top of the list were no tified, and unless they too had laid off work 
for good, they never failed to appear when summoned. Thus the Prefect, who had always 
been reluctant to employ the prisoners in the jail, whether short-term  men or lifers, was 
able to avoid recourse to this distastefu l measure. As long, he said, as there were 
unemployed, we could afford to wait.  Thus until the end of August our fellow citizens could be conveyed to their last resting-place, if not under very decorous conditions, at l east in a manner orderly enough 
for the authorities to feel that they were  doing their duty by the d ead and the bereaved. 
However, we may here anticipate a little and describe the pass to which we came in the final phase. From August onwards the plague mo rtality was and continued such as far to 
exceed the capacity of our small cemetery. Such expedients as knocking down walls and 
letting the dead encroach on neighboring land proved inadequate; some new method had 
to be evolved without delay. The first step  taken was to bury th e dead by night, which 
obviously permitted a more summary procedure. The bodies were piled into ambulances in larger and larger numbers. And the few belated wayfarers who, in defiance of the 
regulations, were abroad in the outlying districts after cu rfew hour, or whose duties took 
them there, often saw the long white ambulances hurtling past, making the nightbound streets reverberate with the dull clangor of their bells. 
 The corpses were tipped pell-mell into th e pits and had hardly settled into place 
when spadefuls of quicklime began to sear  their faces and the earth covered them 
indisdinctively, in ho les dug steadily deeper as time went on. 
 Shortly afterwards, however, it became necessary to find new space and to strike 
out in a new direction. By a special urgency m easure the denizens of gr ants in perpetuity 
were evicted from their graves and the exhum ed remains dispatched to the crematorium. 
And soon the plague victims likewise had to go to a fiery end. 
 This meant that the old crematorium east of  the town, outside the gates, had to be 
utilized. Accordingly the east-gate sentry post was moved farther out. Then a municipal 
employee had an idea that greatly helped th e harassed authorities; he advised them to 
employ the streetcar line runni ng along the coastal road, which was now unused. So the 
interiors of streetcars and trailers were adap ted to this new purpose, and a branch line was 
laid down to the crematorium, which thus became a terminus. 
 During all the late summer and throughout the autumn there could daily be seen 
moving along the road skirting the cliffs above the sea a strange procession of 
passengerless streetcars swaying against the skyline. The residents in this area soon 
learned what was going on. And though the cliffs  were patrolled day and night, little 
groups of people contrived to thread their way unseen between the rocks and would toss flowers into the open trailers as the cars  went by. And in the warm darkness of the 
summer nights the cars could be heard clan king on their way, laden with flowers and 
corpses.  During the first few days an oily, foul-smelling cloud of smoke hung low upon the eastern districts of the town. These effl uvia, all the doctors agreed, though unpleasant, 
were not in the least harmful. Ho wever, the residents of this part of the town threatened to 
migrate in a body, convinced that germs were raining down on them from the sky, with the result that an elaborate apparatus for di verting the smoke had to be installed to 
appease them. Thereafter only when a strong wi nd was blowing did a faint, sickly odor coming from the east remind them that they were living under a new order and that the 
plague fires were taki ng their nightly toll. 
 Such were the consequences of the epidemic at its culminating point. Happily it 
grew no worse, for otherwise, it may well be believed, the re sourcefulness of our 
administration, the competence of our official s, not to mention the burning-capacity of 
our crematorium, would have proved unequal to  their tasks. Rieux knew that desperate 
solutions had been mooted, such as throwing the corpses into the sea, and a picture had 
risen before him of hideous jetsam lolling in the shallows under the cliffs. He knew, too, 
that if there was another rise in the death- rate, no organization, however efficient, could 
stand up to it; that men would die in heaps, and corpses rot in the street, whatever the 
authorities might do, and the town would s ee in public squares the dying embrace the 
living in the frenzies of an all too comp rehensible hatred or some crazy hope. 
 Such were the sights and apprehensions th at kept alive in our townspeople their 
feeling of exile and separation. In this connection the narrator is well aware how regrettable is his inability to record at this point something of a really spectacular order, some heroic feat or memorable deed like those th at thrill us in the chronicles of the past. 
The truth is that nothing is less sensational than pestilen ce, and by reason of their very 
duration great misfortunes are monotonous. In the memories of thos e who lived through 
them, the grim days of plague do not st and out like vivid flames, ravenous and 
inextinguishable, beaconing a troubled sky, but rather like the slow , deliberate progress 
of some monstrous thing cr ushing out all upon its path. 
 No, the real plague had nothing in common with the grandiose imaginings that had haunted Rieux's mind at its outbreak. It was, about all, a shrewd, unflagging 
adversary; a skilled organizer , doing his work thoroughly and well. That, it may be said 
in passing, is why, so as not to play false to the facts, and, still more, so as not to play 
false to himself, the narrator has aimed at objectivity. 
 He has made hardly any changes for the sake of artistic effect, except those 
elementary adjustments needed to present his narrative in a more or less coherent form. 
And in deference to this scruple he is cons trained to admit that, though the chief source of 
distress, the deepest as well as the most wide spread, was separation, and it is his duty to 
say more about it as it existed in the later st ages of the plague, it cannot be denied that 
even this distress was coming to lose something of its poignancy. 
 Was it that our fellow citizens, even those who had felt the parting from their loved ones most keenly, were getting used to doing without them? To assume this would fall somewhat short of the truth. It would be more correct to say that they were wasting 
away emotionally as well as physically. At th e beginning of the plague they had a vivid 
recollection of the absent ones and bitterly felt their loss. But though they could clearly 
recall the face, the smile and voice of the belove d, and this or that occasion when (as they 
now saw in retrospect) they had been supr emely happy, they had trouble in picturing 
what he or she might be doing at the moment when they conj ured up these memories, in a 
setting so hopelessly remote. In short, at th ese moments memory play ed its part, but their 
imagination failed them. During the second pha se of the plague their memory failed 
them, too. Not that they had forgotten the f ace itself, but, what came to the same thing, it 
had lost fleshly substance and they no longer saw it in memory's mirror.  Thus, while during the first weeks they were apt to complain that only shadows 
remained to them of what their love had b een and meant, they now came to learn that even shadows can waste away, losing the fain t hues of life that memory may give. And 
by the end of their long sundering they had also  lost the power of imagining the intimacy 
that once was theirs or unders tanding what it can be to live with someone whose life is 
wrapped up in yours. 
 In this respect they had adapted themselv es to the very condition of the plague, all 
the more potent for its mediocrity. None of  us was capable any longer of an exalted 
emotion; all had trite, monotonous feelings. "It's high time it stopped," people would say, 
because in time of calamity the obvious thing is to desire its end, and in fact they wanted 
it to end. But when making such remarks, we  felt none of the passionate yearning or 
fierce resentment of the early phase; we mere ly voiced one of the few clear ideas that 
lingered in the twilight of our minds. The furi ous revolt of the first weeks had given place 
to a vast despondency, not to be taken fo r resignation, though it was none the less a sort 
of passive and provisional acquiescence.  Our fellow citizens had fallen into line, adapted themselves, as people say, to the situation, because there was no way of doing otherwise. Na turally they retained the 
attitudes of sadness and suffering, but they had ce ased to feel their s ting. Indeed, to some, 
Dr. Rieux among them, this precisely was the mo st disheartening thing: that the habit of 
despair is worse than despair itself.  Hitherto those who were parted had not been utterly unhappy; there was always a gleam of hope in the night of their di stress; but that gleam had now died out. 
 You could see them at street corners,  in cafes or friends' houses, listless, 
indifferent, and looking so bored  that, because of them, the whole town seemed like a 
railway waiting-room. Those who had jobs we nt about them at the exact tempo of the 
plague, with dreary perseverance. Everyone wa s modest. For the first time exiles from 
those they loved had no reluctance to talk fr eely about them, using the same words as 
everybody else, and regarding their deprivation from the same angle as that from which 
they viewed the latest statistics of the ep idemic. This change was striking since until now 
they had jealously withheld their personal grief from the common stoc k of suffering; now 
they accepted its inclusion.  Without memories, without hope, they lived for the moment only. Indeed, the 
here and now had come to mean everything to them. For there is  no denying that the 
plague had gradually killed off in all of us  the faculty not of love only but even of 
friendship. Naturally enough, since love asks something of the future, and nothing was left us but a series of present moments.  However, this account of our predicament gives only the broad lines. Thus, while it is true that all who were parted came ultimate ly to this state, we must add that all did 
not attain it simultaneously; moreover, once th is utter apathy had fallen on them, there 
were still flashes of lucidity, broken lights of memory that rekindled in the exiles a 
younger, keener sensibility. This happened wh en, for instance, they fell to making plans 
implying that the plague had ended. Or when, quite unexpectedly, by some kindly 
chance, they felt a twinge of jealousy, none the less acute for its objectlessness. Others, 
again, had sudden accesses of energy and shook off their languor on certain days of the week, for obvious reasons, on Sundays and Satu rday afternoons, because these had been 
devoted to certain ritual pleas ures in the days when the loved ones were still accessible. 
 Sometimes the mood of melancholy that descended on them with the nightfall 
acted as a sort of warning, not always fulfilled, however, that old memories were floating up to the surface. That evening hour which for believers is the time to look into their 
consciences is hardest of all hours on the prisoner or exile who has nothing to look into 
but the void. For a moment it held them in suspense; then they sank back into their lethargy, the prison door had closed on them once again.  Obviously all this meant giving up what was most personal in their lives.  Whereas in the early days of the plague they had been struck  by the host of small 
details that, while meaning absolutely not hing to others, meant so much to them 
personally, and thus had realized, perhaps for the first time, the uniqueness of each man's 
life; now, on the other hand, they  took an interest only in what interested everyone else, 
they had only general ideas, and even their tenderest affections now seemed abstract, 
items of the common stock. So completely were they dominated by the plague that 
sometimes the one thing they aspired to was the long sleep it brought, and they caught 
themselves thinking:  "A good thing if I get plague and have done  with it!" But really they were asleep 
already; this whole period was for them no more than a long night's slumber. The town was peopled with sleepwalkers, whose trance was broken only on the rare occasions when at night their wounds, to all appear ance closed, suddenly reopened. Then, waking 
with a start, they would r un their fingers over the wounds with a sort of absentminded 
curiosity, twisting their lips, and in a flash th eir grief blazed up again, and abruptly there 
rose before them the mournful visage of thei r love. In the morning they harked back to 
normal conditions, in other words, the plague.  What impression, it may be asked, did these exiles of the plague make on the 
observer? The answer is simple; they made none. Or, to put it differently, they looked 
like everybody else, nondescript. Th ey shared in the torpor of the town and in its puerile 
agitations. They lost every trac e of a critical spirit, while gaining an air of sang-froid. 
You could see, for instance, even the most intelligent among them ma king a show like all 
the rest of studying the newspapers or listeni ng to the radio, in th e hope apparently of 
finding some reason to believe the plague w ould shortly end. They seemed to derive 
fantastic hopes or equally exa ggerated fears from reading th e linens that some journalist 
had scribbled at random, yawning with boredom  at his desk. Meanwhile they drank their 
beer, nursed their sick, idled, or doped themselv es with work, filed documents in offices, 
or played the phonograph at home, without betraying any differe nce from the rest of us. 
In other words, they had ceased to choose for themselves; plague had leveled out discrimination. This could be seen by th e way nobody troubled about the quality of the 
clothes or food he bought. Everyt hing was taken as it came. 
 And, finally, it is worth noting that thos e who were parted ceased to enjoy the 
curious privilege that had been theirs at the outset. They had lost love's egoism and the 
benefit they derived from it. Now, at least, the position was clear; this calamity was everybody's business. What with the gunshots echoi ng at the gates, the punctual thuds of 
rubber stamps marking the rhythm of lives and deaths, the files and fires, the panics and 
formalities, all alike were pl edged to an ugly but recorded death, and, amidst noxious 
fumes and the muted clang of ambulances, all of us ate the same sour bread of exile, 
unconsciously waiting for the same reunion, the same miracle of peace regained. No 
doubt our love persisted, but in  practice it served nothing; it was an inert mass within us, 
sterile as crime or a life sentence. It had declined on a patience that led nowhere, a 
dogged expectation. Viewed from this angle, th e attitude of some of our fellow citizens resembled that of the long queues one saw outside the food-shops. There was the same 
resignation, the same long-sufferance, inexha ustible and without illusions. The only 
difference was that the mental state of the food-seekers would need to be raised to a 
vastly higher power to make it comparable with  the gnawing pain of separation, since this 
latter came from a hunger fierce to the point of  insatiability. In any case, if the reader 
would have a correct idea of the mood of these exiles, we must conjure up once more 
those dreary evenings sifting down thr ough a haze of dust and golden light upon the 
treeless streets filled with teeming crowds of  men and women. For, characteristically, the 
sound that rose toward the terrace s still bathed in th e last glow of daylight, now that the 
noises of vehicles and motors, the sole voice of cities in ordinary times, had ceased, was 
but one vast rumor of low voices and incessa nt footfalls, the drum ming of innumerable 
soles timed to the eerie whistling of the plague  in the sultry air above, the sound of a huge 
concourse of people marking time, a never en ding, stifling drone that, gradually swelling, 
filled the town from end to end, and evening after evening gave its  truest, mournfulest 
expression to the blind endurance that had ousted love from  all our hearts. 
  PART IV  Throughout September and October the town lay prostrate, at the mercy of the plague. 
There was nothing to do but to "mark time," and some hundreds of thousands of men and 
women went on doing this, through w eeks that seemed interminable. 
 Mist, heat, and rain rang th eir changes in our streets. From the south came silent 
coveys of starlings and thrushes, flying very  high, but always gi ving the town a wide 
berth, as though the strange implement of the plague described by Paneloux, the giant 
flail whirling and shrilling over the housetops, warned them off us. At the beginning of 
October torrents of rain swept the streets clean.  And all the time nothing more important befell us than that multitudinous marking 
time.  It was now that Rieux and his friends came to realize how exhausted they were. 
 Indeed, the workers in the sanitary squads had given up trying to cope with their 
fatigue. Rieux noticed the change coming over his associates, and himself as well, and it 
took the form of a strange indifference to ev erything. Men, for instance, who hitherto had 
shown a keen interest in every scrap of news concerning th e plague now displayed none 
at all. Rambert, who had been temporarily put  in charge of a quara ntine station, his hotel 
had been taken over for this purpose, could state at any moment the exact number of persons under his observation, and every detail of the procedure he had laid down for the 
prompt evacuation of those who suddenly deve loped symptoms of the disease was firmly 
fixed in his mind. The same was true of the statistics of the effects of anti-plague inoculations on the persons in his quarantine station. Nevertheless, he  could not have told 
you the week's total of plague deaths, and he could not even have said if the figure was 
rising or falling. And meanwhile, in spite of everything, he had not lost hope of being able to "make his get-away" from one day to another.  As for the others, working themselves almost to a standstill throughout the day 
and far into the night, they never bothered to read a news paper or listen to the radio. 
When told of some unlooked-for recovery, th ey made a show of interest, but actually received the news with the stolid indifferen ce that we may imagine the fighting man in a 
great war to feel who, worn out by the inces sant strain and mindf ul only of the duties 
daily assigned to him, has ceased even to hope for the decisive batt le or the bugle-call of 
armistice. 
 Though he still worked out methodically th e figures relating to the plague, Grand 
would certainly have been quite unable to  say to what they pointed. Unlike Rieux, 
Rambert, and Tarrou, who obviously had grea t powers of endurance, he had never had 
good health. And now, in addition to his duties in the Municipal Office, he had his night 
work and his secretarial post under Rieux. One could see that the st rain was telling on 
him, and if he managed to keep going, it was thanks to two or three fixed ideas, one of 
which was to take, the moment the plague ende d, a complete vacation, of a week at least, 
which he would devote, "hats off," to his work in progress. He was also becoming subject to accesses of sentimentality and at such times would unburden himself to Rieux about 
Jeanne.  Where was she now, he wondered; did he r thoughts sometimes turn to him when 
she read the papers? It was Grand to whom  one day Rieux caught himself talking, much 
to his own surprise, about his wife, and in  the most commonplace terms, something he 
had never done as yet to anyone.  Doubtful how far he could trust his wife 's telegrams, their tone was always 
reassuring, he had decided to wire the hous e physician of the sanatorium. The reply 
informed him that her condition had worsene d, but everything was being done to arrest 
further progress of the disease. He had kept the news to himself so far and could only put 
it down to his nervous exhaustion that he pa ssed it on to Grand. Af ter talking to the 
doctor about Jeanne, Grand had asked some questions about Mme Rieux and, on hearing 
Rieux's reply, said: "You know, it's wonderful, the cures they bring off nowadays." Rieux 
agreed, merely adding that the long separati on was beginning to tell on him, and, what 
was more, he might have helped his wife to make a good recovery; whereas, as things were, she must be feeling terrib ly lonely. After which he fell  silent and gave only evasive 
answers to Grand's further questions.  The others were in much the same st ate. Tarrou held his own better, but the 
entries in his diary show that while his cu riosity had kept its depth, it had lost its 
diversity. Indeed, throughout this period the only pers on, apparently, who really 
interested him was Cottard. In the evening, at Rieux's apartment, where he had come to live now that the hotel was re quisitioned as a quarantine center, he paid little or no 
attention to Grand and the doctor when they re ad over the day's statistics. At the earliest 
opportunity he switched the convers ation over to his pet subject, small details of the daily 
life at Oran.  More perhaps than any of them, Dr. Castel  showed signs of wear and tear. On the 
day when he came to tell Rieux that the anti -plague serum was ready, and they decided to 
try it for the first time on M. Othon's small son, whose case seemed all but hopeless, Rieux suddenly noticed, while he was announcing the latest statistics, that Castel was 
slumped in his chair, sound asleep. The difference in his old friend's face shocked him.  The smile of benevolent irony that alwa ys played on it had seemed to endow it 
with perpetual youth; now, abrup tly left out of control, with  a trickle of saliva between 
the slightly parted lips, it be trayed its age and the wastage of the years. And, seeing this, 
Rieux felt a lump come to his throat.  It was by such lapses that Rieux could gauge his exhaustion. His sensibility was 
getting out of hand. Kept under all the time, it had grown hard and brittle and seemed to 
snap completely now and then, leav ing him the prey of his emotions. 
 No resource was left him but to tight en the stranglehold on his feelings and 
harden his heart protectively. For he kne w this was the only way of carrying on. 
 In any case, he had few illusions left, a nd fatigue was robbing him of even these 
remaining few. He knew that, over a period whos e end he could not glimpse, his task was 
no longer to cure but to diagnos e. To detect, to see, to describe, to register, and then 
condemn, that was his present function. Some times a woman would clutch his sleeve, 
crying shrilly: "Doctor, you'll save him, won't you?" 
 But he wasn't there for saving life; he was there to order a sick man's evacuation. 
How futile was the hatred he saw on faces then! "You haven't a heart!" a woman told him 
on one occasion. She was wrong; he had one. It saw him through his twenty-hour day, 
when he hourly watched men dying who were mean t to live. It enable d him to start anew 
each morning. He had just enough heart for th at, as things were now. How could that 
heart have sufficed for saving life?  No, it wasn't medical aid that he dispensed in those crowded days, only 
information. Obviously that could hardly be reckoned a man's job. Yet, when all was said 
and done, who, in that terror-stricken, decimated populace, had scope for any activity worthy of his manhood? Indeed, for Rieux his exhaustion was a blessi ng in disguise. Had 
he been less tired, his senses more alert, that all-pervading odor of death might have made him sentimental. But when a man has had only four hours' sleep, he isn't sentimental. He sees things as they are; that is to say, he sees them in the garish light of 
justice, hideous, witless justice. And those others, the men and women under sentence to 
death, shared his bleak enlightenment. Before the plague he was welcomed as a savior. He was going to make them right with a couple of pills or an injection, and people took 
him by the arm on his way to the sickroom . Flattering, but dangerous. Now, on the 
contrary, he came accompanied by soldiers, and they had to hammer on the door with 
rifle-butts before the family would open it. Th ey would have liked to drag him, drag the 
whole human race, with them to the grave. Yes, it was quite true that men can't do without their fellow men; that he was as helpless as these unhappy people and he, too, 
deserved the same faint thrill of pity that  he allowed himself once he had left them. 
 Such, anyhow, were the thoughts that in those endless-seeming weeks ran in the doctor's mind, along with thoughts about his severance from his wife. And such, too, 
were his friends' thoughts, judging by the look he saw on their faces. But the most dangerous effect of the exhaustion steadily ga ining on all engaged in the fight against the 
epidemic did not consist in their relative indifference to outside events and the feelings of others, but in the slackness and supine-ness th at they allowed to invade their personal 
lives. They developed a tendency to shirk ev ery movement that didn't seem absolutely 
necessary or called for efforts that seemed too great to be worth while. Thus these men were led to break, oftener and oftener, the rules of hygiene they themselves had 
instituted, to omit some of the numerous di sinfections they should have practiced, and 
sometimes to visit the homes of people su ffering from pneumonic plague without taking 
steps to safeguard themselves against infect ion, because they had been notified only at 
the last moment and could not be bothered wi th returning to a sanitary service station, 
sometimes a considerable distance away, to ha ve the necessary instillations. There lay the real danger; for the energy they devoted to righting the disease made them all the more 
liable to it. In short, they were gambling on their luck, and luck is not to be coerced. 
 There was, however, one man in the town who seemed neither exhausted nor 
discouraged; indeed, the living image of  contentment. It was Cottard. Though 
maintaining contact with Rieux and Rambert,  he still kept rather aloof, whereas he 
deliberately cultivated Tarrou, seeing him as often as Tarrou's scanty leisure permitted. 
He had two reasons for this: one, that Tarrou kn ew all about his case, and the other, that 
he always gave him a cordial welcome and made him feel at ease. That was one of the remarkable things about Tarrou; no matter how much work he had put in, he was always 
a ready listener and an agreeable companion. Even when, some evenings, he seemed completely worn out, the next day brought him a new lease of energy. "Tarrou's a fellow one can talk to," Cottard once told Rambert,  "because he's really human. He always 
understands."  This may explain why the en tries in Tarrou's diary of this period tend to converge 
on Cottard's personality. It is obvious that Tarrou was attempting to  give a full-length 
picture of the man and noted all his reactions  and reflections, whether as conveyed to him 
by Cottard or interpreted by himself. Under th e heading "Cottard and his Relations with 
the Plague," we find a series , of notes covering several pages and, in the narrator's 
opinion, these are well wo rth summarizing here. 
 One of the entries gives Tarrou's genera l impression of Cottard at this time: 
 "He is blossoming out. Expanding in geniality and good humor." For Cottard was anything but upset by the turn events were taking. Sometimes in Tarrou's company he 
voiced his true feelings in remarks of this or der: "Getting worse every day, isn't it? Well, 
anyhow, everyone's in the same boat."  "Obviously," Tarrou comments, "he's in the same peril of death as everyone else, but that's just the point; he's in it with the others. And then I'm pretty sure he doesn't 
seriously think he runs much personal risk. He  has got the idea into his head, apparently, 
and perhaps it's not so farfetched as it s eems, that a man suffering from a dangerous 
ailment or grave anxiety is allergic to other ailments and anxieties. 'Have you noticed,' he asked me, 'that no one ever runs two diseases at once? Let's suppose you have an incurable disease like cancer or a galloping consumption, well, you'll never get plague or typhus; it's a physical impossibility. In fact, one  might go farther; have you ever heard of 
a man with cancer being killed in an auto sm ash?' This theory, for what it's worth, keeps 
Cottard cheerful. The thing he'd most detest is being cut off from others; he'd rather be one of a beleaguered crowd than a prisoner alone. The plague has put an effective stop to police inquiries, sleuthings, wa rrants of arrest, and so forth. Come to that, we have no 
police nowadays; no crimes past or presen t, no more criminals, only condemned men 
hoping for the most capricious of pardons; a nd among these are the police themselves." 
 Thus Cottard (if we may trust Tarro u's diagnosis) had good grounds for viewing 
the symptoms of mental confusion and distress in those around him with an 
understanding and an indulgent satisfaction that might have found expression in the 
remark: "Prate away, my friends, but I had it first!"  "When I suggested to him," Tarrou conti nues, "that the surest  way of not being 
cut off from others was having a clean consci ence, he frowned. 'If that is so, everyone's 
always cut off from everyone else.' And a moment later he added: 'Say what you like, Tarrou, but let me tell you this: the one way of making people hang together is to give 'em a spell of plague. You've only got to look around you.' Of course I see his point, and I 
understand how congenial our present mode of life  must be to him. How could he fail to 
recognize at every turn reactions  that were his; th e efforts everyone makes to keep on the 
right side of other people ; the obligingness sometimes s hown in helping someone who 
has lost his way, and the ill humor shown at other times; the way people flock to the 
luxury restaurants, their pleasur e at being there and their relu ctance to leave; the crowds 
lining up daily at the picture- houses, filling theaters and music halls and even dance halls, 
and flooding boisterously out into the square s and avenues; the shrinking from every 
contact and, notwithstanding, the craving for human warmth that urges people to one 
another, body to body, sex to sex?  Cottard has been through all that obviously, with one exception; we may rule out 
women in his case. With that mug of his! And I should say that when tempted to visit a brothel he refrains; it might give him a ba d name and be held up against him one day. 
 "In short, this epidemic has done him proud. Of a lonely man who hated loneliness it has made an accomplice. Yes, 'acco mplice' is the word that fits, and doesn't 
he relish his complicity! He is happily at one with all around him, w ith their superstitions, 
their groundless panics, the su sceptibilities of people whos e nerves are always on the 
stretch; with their fixed idea of talking the least possible about pla gue and nevertheless 
talking of it all the time ; with their abject terror at th e slightest headache, now they know 
headache to be an early symptom of the diseas e; and, lastly, with th eir frayed, irritable 
sensibility that takes offense at trifling overs ights and brings tears to their eyes over the 
loss of a trouser-button."  Tarrou often went out with Cottard in the evening, and he describes how they 
would plunge together into the dark crowds  filling the streets at  nightfall; how they 
mingled, shoulder to shoulder, in the black -and-white moving mass lit here and there by 
the fitful gleam of a street-lamp; and how they let themselves be swept along with the 
human herd toward resorts of pleasure whos e companionable warmth seemed a safeguard 
from the plague's cold breath. What Cottard had some months previously been looking 
for in public places, luxury and the lavish lif e, the frenzied orgies he had dreamed of 
without being able to procure them, thes e were now the quest of a whole populace. 
Though prices soared inevitably, never had so much money been squandered, and while 
bare necessities were often lacking, never had so much been spent on superfluities. All 
the recreations of leisure, due though it now was to unemployment, multiplied a 
hundredfold. Sometimes Tarrou and Cottard woul d follow for some minutes one of those 
amorous couples who in the past would have tried to hide the passion drawing them to 
each other, but now, pressed cl osely to each other's side, paraded the streets among the 
crowd, with the trancelike self -absorption of great lovers, oblivious of the people around 
them.  Cottard watched them gloatingly. "Good wo rk, my dears!" he'd exclaim. "Go to 
it!" Even his voice had changed, grown louder;  as Tarrou wrote, he was "blossoming out" 
in the congenial atmosphere of mass excitement, fantastically large tips clinking on cafe tables, love-affairs shaping under his eyes.  However, Tarrou seemed to detect little if any spiteful-ness in Cottard's attitude. 
His "I've been through the mill myself" had more  pity than triumph in it. "I suspect," 
Tarrou wrote, "that he's getting quite fond of  these people shut up under their little patch 
of sky within their city walls. For instance, he'd like to explain to them, if he had a chance, that it isn't so terrible as all that. 'Y ou hear them saying,' he told me, ' "After the 
plague I'll do this or that."... They're eating their hearts out instead  of staying put. And 
they don't even realize their privileges. Take my  case: could I say "Aft er my arrest I'll do 
this or that"? Arrest's a begi nning, not an end. Whereas plague.... 
 Do you know what I think? They're fr etting simply because they won't let 
themselves go. And I know what I'm talking about.'" 
 "Yes, he knows what he's talking about," Tarrou added. "He has an insight into the anomalies in the lives of the people here  who, though they have an  instinctive craving 
for human contacts, can't bring themselves to yield to it, because of the mistrust that 
keeps them apart. For it's common knowledge  that you can't trust your neighbor; he may 
pass the disease to you without your knowing it,  and take advantage of a moment of 
inadvertence on your part to infect you. When  one has spent one's days, as Cottard has, 
seeing a possible police spy in everyone, even in persons he feels drawn to, it's easy to understand this reaction. One can have fellow-feelings toward people who are haunted by the idea that when they least expect it pl ague may lay its cold hand on their shoulders, 
and is, perhaps, about to do so at the very moment when one is congratulating oneself on 
being safe and sound. So far as this is possible,  he is at ease under a reign of terror. But I 
suspect that, just because he has been through it before them, he can't wholly share with 
them the agony of this feeling of  uncertainty that never leaves  them. It comes to this: like 
all of us who have not yet died of plague he  fully realizes that his freedom and his life 
may be snatched from him at any moment. Bu t since he, personally, has learned what it is 
to live in a state of constant fear, he finds it normal that others s hould come to know this 
state. Or perhaps it should be put like this : fear seems to him mo re bearable under these 
conditions than it was when he had to bear its burden alone. In this respect he's wrong, and this makes him harder to understand than othe r people. Still, after all, that's why he is 
worth a greater effort to understand." 
 Tarrou's notes end with a story illustrati ng the curious state of mind arrived at no 
less by Cottard than by other dwel lers in the plague-stricken to wn. The story re-creates as 
nearly as may be the curiously feverish atmo sphere of this period, and that is why the 
narrator attaches importance to it. 
 One evening Cottard and Tarrou went to the Municipal Opera House, where Gluck's Orpheus was being given. Cottard had invited Tarrou. A touring operatic 
company had come to Oran in the spring for a series of performances. Marooned there by 
the outbreak of plague and finding themselves in difficulties, the company and the management of the opera house had come to an agreement under which they were to give one performance a week until further notice. Thus for several months our theater had been resounding every Friday  evening with the melodious  laments of Orpheus and 
Eurydice's vain appeals. None the less, the opera continued in high favor and played 
regularly to full houses. From their seats, th e most expensive, Cottard and Tarrou could 
look down at the orchestra seats filled to capac ity with the cream of Oran society. It was 
interesting to see how careful they were, as th ey went to their places, to make an elegant 
entrance. While the musicians were discreetly tuning up, men in evening dress could be 
seen moving from one row to another, bowing gracefully to friends under the flood of light bathing the proscenium. In the soft  hum of well-mannered conversation they 
regained the confidence denied them when th ey walked the dark streets of the town; 
evening dress was a sure charm against plague.  Throughout the first act Orpheus lamented suavely his lost Eurydice, with women 
in Grecian tunics singing melodious comments on his plig ht, and love was hymned in 
alternating strophes. The audience showed thei r appreciation in discre et applause. Only a 
few people noticed that in his song of the second act Orpheus intr oduced some tremolos 
not in the score and voiced an almost exagge rated emotion when begging the lord of the 
Underworld to be moved by his tears. Some rather jerky movements he indulged in gave 
our connoisseurs of stagecraft an impression of clever, if sligh tly overdone, effects, 
intended to bring out the em otion of the words he sang. 
 Not until the big duet between Orpheus a nd Eurydice in the third act, at the 
precise moment when Eurydice was slipping from  her lover, did a flutter of surprise run 
through the house. And as though th e singer had been waiting for this cue or, more likely, 
because the faint sounds that came to him fr om the orchestra seats confirmed what he 
was feeling, he chose this moment to stagger grotesquely to the footlights, his arms and 
legs splayed out under his antique robe, a nd fall down in the middle of the property 
sheepfold, always out of place, but now, in the eyes of the spectators, significantly, 
appallingly so.  For at the same moment  the orchestra stopped play ing, the audience rose and 
began to leave the auditorium, slowly and si lently at first, like worshippers leaving 
church when the service ends, or a death- chamber after a farewell visit to the dead, 
women lifting their skirts and moving with bowed heads, men steering the ladies by the 
elbow to prevent their brushing against the tip-up seats at the e nds of the rows. But 
gradually their movements quickened, whispers  rose to exclamations, and finally the 
crowd stampeded toward the exits, wedged t ogether in the bottlenecks, and pouring out 
into the street in a confused ma ss, with shrill cries of dismay. 
 Cottard and Tarrou, who had merely risen from their seats, gazed down at what 
was a dramatic picture of their life in those days: plague on the stag e in the guise of a 
disarticulated mummer, and in the auditorium the toys of luxury, so futile now, forgotten 
fans and lace shawls derelict on the red plush seats.   DURING the first part of September Ramber t had worked conscientiously at Rieux's 
side. He had merely asked for a few hours' l eave on the day he was due to meet Gonzales 
and the two youngsters again outside the boys' school. Gonzales kept the appointment, at 
noon, and while he and the journalist were ta lking, they saw the two boys coming toward 
them, laughing. They said they'd had no luck last time, but that was only to be expected. Anyhow, it wasn't their turn for guard duty th is week. Rambert must have patience till 
next week; then they'd have another shot at it. Rambert observed that "patience" certainly 
was needed in this business. Gonzales s uggested they should all meet again on the 
following Monday, and this time Rambert had better move in to stay with Marcel and Louis.  "We'll make a date, you and I. If I don' t turn up, go straight to their place. 
 I'll give you the address." But Marcel, or L ouis, told him that the safest thing was 
to take his pal there right away, then he'd be sure of finding it. If he wasn't too particular, there was enough grub for the four of them. That way he'd get the hang of things. Gonzales agreed it was a good idea, and the four of them set off toward the harbor.  Marcel and Louis lived on the outskirts of the dockyard, near the gate leading to 
the cliff road. It was a small Spanish house w ith gaily painted shutters and bare, dark 
rooms. The boys' mother, a wrinkled old Sp anish woman with a smiling face, produced a 
dish of which the chief ingredient was rice. Gonzales showed surprise, as rice had been 
unprocurable for some time in the town. "We fix it up at the gate," Marcel explained. 
Rambert ate and drank heartily, and Gonzales informed him he was "a damned good sort." Actually the journalist was th inking solely of the coming week. 
 It turned out that he had a fortnight to  wait, as the periods  of guard duty were 
extended to two weeks, to reduce the number of shifts. During that fortnight Rambert 
worked indefatigably, giving every ounce of hi mself, with his eyes shut, as it were, from 
dawn till night. He went to bed very late  and always slept like a log. This abrupt 
transition from a life of idleness to one of constant work had left him almost void of 
thoughts or energy. He talked li ttle about his impending escap e. Only one incident is 
worth noting: after a week he c onfessed to the doctor that for the first time he'd got really 
drunk. It was the evening before ; on leaving the bar he had an impression that his groin 
was swollen and he had pains in his armpits wh en he moved his arms. "I'm in for it!" he 
thought.  And his only reaction, an absurd one, as he frankly admitted to Rieux, had been to start running to the upper town and when he re ached a small square, from which if not the 
sea, a fairly big patch of open sky could be s een, to call to his wife with a great cry, over 
the walls of the town. On retu rning home and failing to discover any symptoms of plague 
on his body, he had felt far from proud of having given way like that. Rieux, however, 
said he could well understand one's being m oved to act thus. "Or, anyhow, one may 
easily feel inclined that way."  "Monsieur Othon was talking to me a bout you this morning," Rieux suddenly 
remarked, when Rambert was bidding him good night. "He asked me if I knew you, and I 
told him I did. Then he said: 'If he's a friend of yours advise him not to associate with smugglers. It's bound to attract attention.' "  "Meaning what?"  "It means you'd better hurry up."  "Thanks." Rambert shook the doctor's hand.  In the doorway he suddenly swung round. Rieux noticed that, for the first time since the outbreak of plague, he was smiling.  "Then why don't you stop my going? You could easily manage it."  Rieux shook his head with his usual deliberateness. It was none of his business, he said. Rambert had elected for happiness, and he, Rieux, had no argument to put up 
against him. Personally he felt incapable of  deciding which was the right course and 
which the wrong in such a case as Rambert's.  "If that's so, why tell me to hurry up?"  It was Rieux who now smiled.  "Perhaps because I, too, would like to do my bit for happiness." 
 Next day, though they were working together  most of the time, neither referred to 
the subject. On the following Sunday Rambert moved into the little Spanish house. He 
was given a bed in the living-room. As the brothers did not come home for meals and 
he'd been told to go out as little as possible, he was always alone but for occasional meetings with the boys' mother. She was a dried-up little wisp of a woman, always dressed in black, busy as a bee, and she had a nut-brown, wrinkled face and immaculately 
white hair. No great-talker, she merely smiled genially when her eyes fell on Rambert. 
 On one of the few occasions when she spoke, it was to ask him if he wasn't afraid of infecting his wife with pla gue. He replied that there might  be some risk of that, but 
only a very slight one; while if he stayed in the town, th ere was a fair chance of their 
never seeing each other again.  The old woman smiled. "Is she nice?"  "Very nice."  "Pretty?"  "I think so."  "Ah," she nodded, "that explains it."  Rambert reflected. No doubt that explai ned it, but it was impossible that that 
alone explained it.  The old woman went to Mass every morning. "Don't you believe in God?" she asked him.  On Rambert's admitting he did not, she said again that "that explained it." 
 "Yes," she added, "you're right. You must go back to her. Or else what would be left you?"  Rambert spent most of the day prowling round the room, gazing vaguely at the distempered walls, idly fingering the fans that  were their only deco ration, or counting the 
woollen balls on the tablecloth fringe. In the evening the youngste rs came home; they 
hadn't much to say, except that the time hadn't  come yet. After dinner Marcel played the 
guitar, and they drank an anise-flavored  liqueur. Rambert seemed lost in thought. 
 On Wednesday Marcel announced: "It's for tomorrow night, at midnight. Be ready on time." Of the two men sharing the sentry po st with them, he explained, one had got 
plague and the other, who had slept in th e same room, was now under observation. Thus 
for two or three days Marcel and Louis would be alone at the post. They'd fix up the final 
details in the course of the night, and he could count on them to see it through. Rambert 
thanked them.  "Pleased?" the old woman asked.  He said yes, but his thoughts were elsewhere.  The next day was very hot and muggy a nd a heat-mist veiled the sun. The total of 
deaths had jumped up. But the old Spanis h woman lost nothing of her serenity. 
 "There's so much wickedness in the wo rld," she said. "So what can you expect?" 
 Like Marcel and Louis, Rambert was stri pped to the waist. But, even so, sweat 
was trickling down his chest and between his shoulder-blades. In the dim light of the 
shuttered room their tors os glowed like highly polished mahogany. Rambert kept 
prowling round like a caged animal, without speaking. Abruptly at four in the afternoon he announced that he was going out.  "Don't forget," Marcel said. "At midnight sharp. Everything's set."  Rambert went to the doctor's apartment.  Rieux's mother told him he would find 
the doctor at the hospital in the upper town. As  before, a crowd was circling in front of 
the entrance gates. "Move on, there!" a police sergeant with bulging eyes bawled every 
few minutes. And the crowd kept moving, but always in a circle. "No use hanging round here." The sergeant's coat was soaked in sweat.  They knew it was "no use," but they st ayed on, despite the devastating heat.  Rambert showed his pass to the sergeant, who told him to go to Tarrou's office. 
 Its door opened on the courtyard. He passed Father Paneloux, who was coming out of the office.  Tarrou was sitting at a black wood des k, with his sleeves rolled up, mopping up 
with his handkerchief a trickle of sweat in the bend of his ar m. The office, a small, white-
painted room, smelt of drugs and damp cloth.  "Still here?" asked Tarrou.  "Yes. I'd like to have a word with Rieux."  "He's in the ward. Look here! Don't you think you could fix up whatever you've come for without seeing him?"  "Why?"  "He's overdoing it. I spare him as much as I can."  Rambert gazed thoughtfully at Tarrou. He'd  grown thinner, his eyes and features 
were blurred with fatigue, his broad shoulde rs sagged. There was a knock at the door. A 
male attendant, wearing a white mask, entered. He laid a little sheaf of cards on Tarrou's 
desk and, his voice coming thickly through the cloth, said:  "Six," then went out. Ta rrou looked at the journalist and showed him the cards, 
spreading them fanwise.  "Neat little gadgets, aren't they? Well, they're deaths.  Last night's deaths." Frowning, he sli pped the cards together. "The only thing 
that's left us is accountancy!"  Taking his purchase on the tabl e, Tarrou rose to his feet. 
 "You're off quite soon, I take it?"  "Tonight, at midnight."  Tarrou said he was glad to hear it, and Rambert had better look after himself for a 
bit. 
 "Did you say that, sincerely?" 
 Tarrou shrugged his shoulders.  "At my age one's got to be sinc ere. Lying's too much effort." 
 "Excuse me, Tarrou," the journalist said, " but I'd greatly like to see the doctor." 
 "I know. He's more human than I. All right, come along."  "It's not that." Rambert stumbled over his words and broke off.  Tarrou stared at him; then, unexp ectedly, his face broke into a smile. 
 They walked down a narrow passage; the walls were painted pale green, and the 
light was glaucous, like that in an aquarium . Before they reached the glazed double door 
at the end of the passage, behind which sh adowy forms could be seen moving, Tarrou 
took Rambert into a small room, all the wall space of which was occupied by cupboards. Opening one of these, he took from a steril izer two masks of cotton-wool enclosed in 
muslin, handed one to Rambert, and told him to put it on.  The journalist asked if it was really any use. Tarr ou said no, but it inspired 
confidence in others.  They opened the glazed door. It led into  a very large room, all the windows of 
which were shut, in spite of the great heat. Electric fans buzzed near the ceiling, churning 
up the stagnant, overheated air a bove two long rows of gray beds. Groans shrill or stifled 
rose on all sides, blending in a monotonous di rgelike refrain. Men in white moved slowly 
from bed to bed under the garish light flooding in from high, barred windows. The appalling heat in the ward ma de Rambert ill at ease, and he had difficulty in recognizing 
Rieux, who was bending over a groaning form . The doctor was lancing the patient's 
groin, while two nurses, one on each side, held his legs apart. Presently Rieux 
straightened up, dropped his instruments into a tr ay that an attendant held out to him, and 
remained without moving for some moment s, gazing down at the man, whose wound was 
now being dressed. 
 "Any news?" he asked Tarrou, who had come beside him.  "Paneloux is prepared to replace Rambert at  the quarantine station. He has put in a 
lot of useful work already. A ll that remains is to reorganize group number three, now that 
Rambert's going."  Rieux nodded.  "Castel has his first lot of serum ready now," Tarrou continued. "He's in favor of its being tried at once."  "Good," Rieux said. "That's good news."  "And Rambert's come."  Rieux looked round. His eyes narrowed  above the mask when he saw the 
journalist.  "Why have you come?" he asked. "Surely you should be elsewhere?"  Tarrou explained that it was fixed for midnight, to which Rambert added: "That's 
the idea, anyhow."  Whenever any of them spoke through th e mask, the muslin bulged and grew moist 
over the lips. This gave a sort of unreality to the conversation; it was like a colloquy of 
statues.  "I'd like to have a word with you," Rambert said.  "Right. I'm just going. Wait for me in Tarrou's office."  A minute or so later Rambert and Rieux we re sitting at the back of the doctor's 
car. Tarrou, who was at the wheel, lo oked round as he let in the gear. 
 "Gas is running out," he said. "W e'll have to foot-slog it tomorrow." 
 "Doctor," Rambert said, "I'm not going. I want to stay with you."  Tarrou made no movement; he went on driving. Rieux seemed unable to shake off his fatigue.  "And what about her?" His voice was hardly audible.  Rambert said he'd thought it over very carefully, and his views hadn't changed, but if he went away, he would feel ashame d of himself, and that would embarrass his 
relations with the woman he loved.  Showing more animation, Rieux told him that was sheer nonsense; there was nothing shameful in preferring happiness.  "Certainly," Rambert replied. "But it ma y be shameful to be happy by oneself." 
 Tarrou, who had not spoken so far, now remarked, without turning his head, that if Rambert wished to take a share in other people's unhappiness, he'd have no time left for 
happiness. So the choice had to be made.  "That's not it," Rambert rejoined. "Until now I always felt a stranger in this town, 
and that I'd no concern with you people. But now that I've seen what I have seen, I know 
that I belong here whether I want it or not. This business is everybody's business." When 
there was no reply from either of the others , Rambert seemed to gr ow annoyed. "But you know that as well as I do, damn it! Or else what are you up to in that hospital of yours? 
Have you made a definite choi ce and turned down happiness?" 
 Rieux and Tarrou still said nothing, and the silence lasted until they were at the 
doctor's home. Then Rambert repeated his la st question in a yet more emphatic tone. 
 Only then Rieux turned toward him, ra ising himself with an effort from the 
cushion. 
 "Forgive me, Rambert, only, well, I simp ly don't know. But stay with us if you 
want to." A swerve of the car made him break off. Then, looking strai ght in front of him, 
he said: "For nothing in the world is it wort h turning one's back on what one loves. Yet 
that is what I'm doing, though why I do not know." 
 He sank back on the cushion. "That's how  it is," he added wearily, "and there's 
nothing to be done about it. So let's rec ognize the fact and draw the conclusions." 
 "What conclusions?"  "Ah," Rieux said, "a man can't cure and know at the same time. So let's cure as quickly as we can. That's the more urgent job."  At midnight Tarrou and Rie ux were giving Rambert the map of the district he was 
to keep under surveillance. Tarrou glanced at his watch. Looking up, he met Rambert's 
gaze.  "Have you let them know?" he asked.  The journalist looked away.  "I'd sent them a note", he spoke with an effort, "before coming to see you."  Toward the close of October Castel's anti-plague serum was tried for the first 
time. Practically speaking, it was Rieux's last card. If it faile d, the doctor was convinced 
the whole town would be at the mercy of the epidemic, which would either continue its ravages for an unpredictable period or perh aps die out abruptly of its own accord. 
 The day before Castel called on Rieux, M. Othon's son had fallen ill and all the 
family had to go into quarantine. Thus the mo ther, who had only recently come out of it, 
found herself isolated once again. In deference to the official regula tions the magistrate 
had promptly sent for Dr. Rieux the moment he saw symptoms of the disease in his little boy. Mother and father were standing at the bedside when Rieux entered the room. The boy was in the phase of extreme prostrati on and submitted without a whimper to the 
doctor's examination. When Rieux raised his eyes  he saw the magistrate's gaze intent on 
him, and, behind, the mother's pale face. She was holding a handkerchief to her mouth, and her big, dilated eyes followed each of the doctor's movements. 
 "He has it, I suppose?" the magist rate asked in a toneless voice. 
 "Yes." Rieux gazed down at the child again.  The mother's eyes widened yet more, but she still said nothing. M. Othon, too, 
kept silent for a while before saying in an even lower tone:  "Well, doctor, we must do as we are told to do."  Rieux avoided looking at Mme Othon, w ho was still holding her handkerchief to 
her mouth.  "It needn't take long," he said rather  awkwardly, "if you'll let me use your phone." 
 The magistrate said he would take hi m to the telephone. But before going, the 
doctor turned toward Mme Othon.  "I regret very much indeed, but I'm af raid you'll have to get your things ready. 
 You know how it is."  Mme Othon seemed disconcerted. She was staring at the floor. 
 Then, "I understand," she murmured, slow ly nodding her head. "I 'll set about it at 
once."  Before leaving, Rieux on a sudden impulse asked the Othons if there wasn't anything they'd like him to do for them. The mo ther gazed at him in silence. And now the 
magistrate averted his eyes.  "No," he said, then swallowed hard. "But, save my son."  In the early days a mere formality, quar antine had now been reorganized by Rieux 
and Rambert on very strict lines.  In particular they insisted on having member s of the family of a patient kept apart. 
If, unawares, one of them had been infected, the risks of an extension of the infection 
must not be multiplied. Rieux explained this to the magistrate, who signified his approval 
of the procedure. Nevertheless, he and his wi fe exchanged a glance that made it clear to 
Rieux how keenly they both felt the sepa ration thus imposed on them. Mme Othon and 
her little girl could be given rooms in th e quarantine hospital under Rambert's charge. For 
the magistrate, however, no accommodation was available except in an isolation camp 
the authorities were now installing in the municipal stadium, using tents supplied by the highway department. When Rieux apol ogized for the poor accommodation, M. 
 Othon replied that there was one rule for all alike, and it was only proper to abide 
by it.  The boy was taken to the auxiliary hospita l and put in a ward of ten beds which 
had formerly been a classroom. After some  twenty hours Rieux became convinced that 
the case was hopeless. The infection was steadily spreading, and the boy's body putting 
up no resistance. Tiny, half-formed, but acutely  painful buboes were clogging the joints 
of the child's puny limbs. Obviously it was a losing fight.  Under the circumstances Rieux had no qualms about testing Castel's serum on the 
boy. That night, after dinner, they performed the inoculation, a lengthy process, without 
getting the slightest reaction. At daybreak on the following day they gathered round the 
bed to observe the effects of this test inoculation on which so much hung. 
 The child had come out of his extr eme prostration and was tossing about 
convulsively on the bed. From four in the morning Dr. Castel and Tarrou had been 
keeping watch and noting, stage by stage, the progress and remissions of the malady. 
Tarrou's bulky form was slightly drooping at th e head of the bed, while at its foot, with 
Rieux standing beside him, Castel was seate d, reading, with every appearance of calm, an 
old leather-bound book. One by one, as the light increased in the former classroom, the 
others arrived. Paneloux, the first to come, leaned against the wall on the opposite side of 
the bed to Tarrou. His face was drawn with grief, and the accumulated weariness of many 
weeks, during which he had never spared hi mself, had deeply seamed his somewhat 
prominent forehead. Grand came next. It was seven o'clock, and he apologized for being 
out of breath; he could only st ay a moment, but wanted to know  if any definite results had 
been observed. Without speaking, Rieux pointed  to the child. His eyes shut, his teeth 
clenched, his features frozen in an agonized gr imace, he was rolling his head from side to 
side on the bolster. When there was just lig ht enough to make out the half-obliterated 
figures of an equation chalked on a blackboard that still hung on the wa ll at the far end of 
the room, Rambert entered. Posting himself at the foot of the next bed, he took a package 
of cigarettes from his pocket. But after his first glance at the child's face he put it back.  From his chair Castel looked at Rieux over his spectacles. 
 "Any news of his father?" 
 "No," said Rieux. "He's in the isolation camp."  The doctor's hands were gripping the rail  of the bed, his eyes fixed on the small 
tortured body. Suddenly it stiffened, and seemed to give a little at the waist, as slowly the 
arms and legs spread out X-wise. From th e body, naked under an army blanket, rose a 
smell of damp wool and stale sweat. The boy had gritted his teeth again. Then very 
gradually he relaxed, bringing his arms and le gs back toward the center of the bed, still 
without speaking or opening his eyes, and his breathing seemed to quicken. Rieux looked 
at Tarrou, who hastily lowered his eyes.  They had already seen children die, for many months now death had shown no favoritism, but they had never yet watched a child's agony minute by minute, as they had 
now been doing since daybreak. Needless to say, the pain inflic ted on these innocent 
victims had always seemed to them to be wh at in fact it was: an abominable thing. But 
hitherto they had felt its abomination in, so to  speak, an abstract way; they had never had 
to witness over so long a period the death-throes of an innocent child. 
 And just then the boy had a sudden spasm, as if something had bitten him in the 
stomach, and uttered a long, shrill wail. For mo ments that seemed endless he stayed in a 
queer, contorted position, his body racked by con vulsive tremors; it was as if his frail 
frame were bending before the fierce breath of the plague, breaking under the reiterated 
gusts of fever. Then the storm-wind passed, there came a lull, and he relaxed a little; the fever seemed to recede, leaving him gasping for breath on a dank, pest ilential shore, lost 
in a languor that already looke d like death. When for the th ird time the fiery wave broke 
on him, lifting him a little, the child curled hi mself up and shrank away to the edge of the 
bed, as if in terror of the flames advancing on him, licki ng his limbs. A moment later, 
after tossing his head wildly to and fro, he flung off the blanket. From between the 
inflamed eyelids big tears welled up and tr ickled down the sunken, leaden-hued cheeks. 
When the spasm had passed, utterly exhauste d, tensing his thin le gs and arms, on which, 
within forty-eight hours, the flesh had wasted to the bone, the child la y flat, racked on the 
tumbled bed, in a grotesque  parody of crucifixion. 
 Bending, Tarrou gently stroked with his bi g paw the small face stained with tears 
and sweat. Castel had closed  his book a few moments before, and his eyes were now 
fixed on the child. He began to speak, but had to give a cough before continuing, because 
his voice rang out so harshly. 
 "There wasn't any remission this morning, was there, Rieux?"  Rieux shook his head, adding, however, that the child was putting up more resistance than one would have expected. Paneloux, who was slumped against the wall, 
said in a low voice:  "So if he is to die, he will have suffe red longer." Light was in creasing in the ward. 
The occupants of the other nine beds were tossing about and groani ng, but in tones that 
seemed deliberately subdued. Only one, at th e far end of the ward, was screaming, or 
rather uttering little exclamati ons at regular intervals, whic h seemed to convey surprise 
more than pain. Indeed, one had the impressi on that even for the sufferers the frantic 
terror of the early phas e had passed, and there was a sort of mournful resi gnation in their 
present attitude toward the disease. Only th e child went on fighting with all his little 
might. Now and then Rieux took his pulse, less because this served any purpose than as an escape from his utter helplessness, and when he closed his eyes, he seemed to feel its 
tumult mingling with the fever of his own blood. And then, at one with the tortured child, 
he struggled to sustain him with all the remaining strength of his own body. But, linked for a few moments, the rhythms of their heartb eats soon fell apart, the child escaped him, 
and again he knew his impotence. Then he rele ased the small, thin wrist and moved back 
to his place. The light on the whitewashed wa lls was changing from pink to yellow. The 
first waves of another day of heat were beating on the windows. They hardly heard Grand saying he would come back as he turned to  go. All were waiting. The child, his eyes still 
closed, seemed to grow a little calmer. His cl awlike fingers were fe ebly plucking at the 
sides of the bed. Then they ro se, scratched at the blanket ov er his knees, and suddenly he 
doubled up his limbs, bringing his thighs above his stomach, and remained quite still. For the first time he opened his eyes and gazed at Rieux, who was standing immediately in 
front of him. In the small face, rigid as a mask of grayish clay, slowly the lips parted and from them rose a long, incessant scream, hard ly varying with his respiration, and filling 
the ward with a fierce, indignant protest, so little childish that it seemed like a collective voice issuing from all the sufferers there. Rieux clenched his jaws, Tarrou looked away. 
Rambert went and stood beside Castel, w ho closed the book lying on his knees. Paneloux 
gazed down at the small mouth, fouled with th e sores of the plague and pouring out the 
angry death-cry that has sounded through the ages of mankind. He sank on his knees, and 
all present found it natural to hear him say in  a voice hoarse but cl early audible across 
that nameless, never ending wail:  "My God, spare this child!"  But the wail continued without cease and the other sufferers began to grow 
restless. The patient at the far end of the ward, whose little broken cries had gone on 
without a break, now quickened their tempo so that they flowed together in one unbroken 
cry, while the others' groans grew louder . A gust of sobs swept through the room, 
drowning Paneloux's prayer, and Rieux, who was still tightly gripping the rail of the bed, 
shut his eyes, dazed with exhaustion and disgust.  When he opened them again, Tarrou was at his side.  "I must go," Rieux said. "I can't  bear to hear them any longer." 
 But then, suddenly, the other sufferers fe ll silent. And now the doctor grew aware 
that the child's wail, after weakening more and more, had fluttered out into silence. Around him the groans began again, but more fain tly, like a far echo of the fight that now 
was over. For it was over. Castel had moved r ound to the other side of the bed and said 
the end had come. His mouth still gaping, but  silent now, the child was lying among the 
tumbled blankets, a small, shrunken form , with the tears still wet on his cheeks. 
 Paneloux went up to the bed and made th e sign of benediction. Then gathering up 
his cassock, he walked out by the passage between the beds. 
 "Will you have to start it all over again?" Tarrou asked Castel.  The old doctor nodded slowly, with a twisted smile.  "Perhaps. After all, he put up a surprisingly long resistance." 
 Rieux was already on his way out, walki ng so quickly and with such a strange 
look on his face that Paneloux put out an arm to check him when he was about to pass him in the doorway.  "Come, doctor," he began.  Rieux swung round on him fiercely.  "Ah! That child, anyhow, was innocen t, and you know it as well as I do!" 
 He strode on, brushing past Paneloux , and walked across the school playground. 
 Sitting on a wooden bench under the dingy, st unted trees, he wi ped off the sweat 
that was beginning to run into his eyes. He  felt like shouting imprecations, anything to 
loosen the stranglehold lashing his heart wi th steel. Heat was flooding down between the 
branches of the fig trees. A white haze, spr eading rapidly over the blue of the morning 
sky, made the air yet more stifling. Rieux la y back wearily on the bench. Gazing up at the 
ragged branches, the shimmering sky, he slowly  got back his breath and fought down his 
fatigue. 
 He heard a voice behind him. "Why was th ere that anger in your voice just now? 
 What we'd been seeing was as unbe arable to me as it was to you." 
 Rieux turned toward Paneloux.  "I know. I'm sorry. But weariness is a ki nd of madness. And there are times when 
the only feeling I have is one of mad revolt." 
 "I understand," Paneloux said in a lo w voice. "That sort of thing is revolting 
because it passes our human understanding. But perhaps we should love what we cannot 
understand."  Rieux straightened up slowly. He gazed at Paneloux, summoning to his gaze all the strength and fervor he could muster agai nst his weariness. Then he shook his head. 
 "No, Father. I've a very different idea of love. And until my dying day I shall refuse to love a scheme of things in which children are put to torture."  A shade of disquietude crossed the priest's face. "Ah, doctor," he said sadly, "I've just realized what is meant by 'grace.'"  Rieux had sunk back again on the bench. Hi s lassitude had returned and from its 
depths he spoke, more gently:  "It's something I haven't got; that I know . But I'd rather not discuss that with you. 
We're working side by side for something that unites us, beyond blasphemy and prayers. And it's the only thing that matters."  Paneloux sat down beside Rieux. It was obvious that he was deeply moved. 
 "Yes, yes," he said, "you, too, are working for man's salvation." 
 Rieux tried to smile.  "Salvation's much too big a word for me . I don't aim so high. I'm concerned with 
man's health; and for me his health comes first."  Paneloux seemed to hesitate. "Doctor?" he  began, then fell silent. Down his face, 
too, sweat was trickling. Murmuring: "Good-by for the present," he rose.  His eyes were moist. When he turned  to go, Rieux, who had seemed lost in 
thought, suddenly rose and took a step toward him.  "Again, please forgive me. I can promise there won't be another outburst of that 
kind."  Paneloux held out his hand, saying regretfully: 
 "And yet, I haven't convinced you!"  "What does it matter? What I hate is death and disease, as you well know. And 
whether you wish it or not, we're allies, f acing them and fighting them together." Rieux 
was still holding Paneloux's hand. "So you see", but he refrained from meeting the priest's eyes, "God Himself can't part us now."  Since joining Rieux's band of workers Paneloux had spent his entire time in 
hospitals and places where he came in contac t with plague. He had elected for the place 
among his fellow workers that he judged incumbent on him, in the forefront of the fight. 
And constantly since then he had rubbed  shoulders with death. Though theoretically 
immunized by periodical inoculations, he was well aware that at any moment death might 
claim him too, and he had given thought to th is. Outwardly he had lost nothing of his 
serenity. But from the day on which he saw a child die, something seemed to change in 
him. And his face bore traces of the rising tens ion of his thoughts. When one day he told 
Rieux with a smile that he was working on a s hort essay entitled "Is a Priest Justified in 
Consulting a Doctor?" Rieux had gathered th at something graver lay behind the question 
than the priest's tone seemed to imply. On the doctor's saying he would greatly like to 
have a look at the essay, Paneloux informed hi m that he would shortly be preaching at a 
Mass for men, and his sermon would convey some at least of his c onsidered opinions on 
the question.  "I hope you'll come, doctor. The subject will interest you.".  A high wind was blowing on the day Fa ther Paneloux preached his second 
sermon.  The congregation, it must be admitted, was sparser than on the first occasion, 
partly because this kind of performan ce had lost its novelty for our townsfolk. 
 Indeed, considering the abnormal conditions  they were up against, the very word 
"novelty" had lost all meaning. Moreover, most people, assuming they had not altogether abandoned religious observances , or did not combine them naively with a thoroughly 
immoral way of living, had replaced norma l religious practice by more or less 
extravagant superstitions. Thus they were read ier to wear prophylactic medals of St. Roch 
than to go to Mass.  An illustration may be found in the remarkab le interest shown in prophecies of all 
descriptions. True, in the spring, when the epid emic was expected to end abruptly at any 
moment, no one troubled to take another's opinion as to its probable duration, since 
everyone had persuaded himself that it would have none.  But as the days went by, a fear grew up that the calamity might last indefinitely, 
and then the ending of the plague became the target of all hopes. 
 As a result copies of predictions attributed  to soothsayers or saints of the Catholic 
Church circulated freely from hand to hand. Th e local printing firms we re quick to realize 
the profit to be made by pande ring to this new craze and pr inted large numbers of the 
prophecies that had been going round in manuscript.  Finding that the public appetite for this type of literature was still unsated, they had researches made in the municipal librari es for all the mental pabulum of the kind 
available in old chronicles, memoirs, and th e like. And when this source ran dry, they 
commissioned journalists to write up forecasts, and, in this respect at least, the journalists 
proved themselves equal to their prototypes of earlier ages.  Some of these prophetic writings were act ually serialized in our newspapers and 
read with as much avidity as  the love-stories that had o ccupied these columns in the 
piping times of health. Some predictions were based on far-fetched arithmetical calculations, involving the figures  of the year, the total of deaths, and the number of 
months the plague had so far lasted. Others made comparisons with the great pestilences of former times, drew parallels (which the fo recasters called "constants"), and claimed to deduce conclusions bearing on the present ca lamity. But our most popular prophets were 
undoubtedly those who in an apocalyptic jar gon had announced sequences of events, any 
one of which might be construed as applicab le to the present state of affairs and was 
abstruse enough to admit of almost any in terpretation. Thus Nostradamus and St. Odilia 
were consulted daily, and always with happy results. 
 Indeed, the one thing th ese prophecies had in comm on was that, ultimately, all 
were reassuring. Unfortunatel y, though, the plague was not. 
 Thus superstition had usurped the place of religion in the life of our town, and that 
is why the church in which Paneloux preach ed his sermon was only three-quarters full. 
That evening, when Rieux arrived, the wi nd was pouring in great gusts through the 
swing-doors and filling the aisles with sudden drafts. And it was in a cold, silent church, 
surrounded by a congregation of men exclusivel y, that Rieux watched the Father climb 
into the pulpit. He spoke in a gender, more thoughtful tone than on the previous occasion, 
and several times was noticed to be stumb ling over his words. A yet more noteworthy 
change was that instead of sa ying "you" he now said "we." 
 However, his voice grew gradually firmer  as he proceeded. He started by recalling 
that for many a long month plague had been in our midst, and we now knew it better, after having seen it often seated  at our tables or at the beds ides of those we loved. We had 
seen it walking at our side, or waiting fo r our coming at the places where we worked. 
Thus we were now, perhaps, better able to comprehend what it was telling us unceasingly; a message to which, in the first shock of the visitation, we might not have listened with due heed. What he, Father Pane loux, had said in his first sermon still held 
good, such, anyhow, was his belief. And yet, perh aps, as may befall any one of us (here 
he struck his breast), his words and thoughts had lacked in charity. However this might 
be, one thing was not to be gainsaid; a f act that always, under all circumstances, we 
should bear in mind. 
 Appearances notwithstanding, all trials, however cruel, worked together for good 
to the Christian. And, indeed, what a Christian should always seek in his hour of trial was 
to discern that good, in what it consisted and how best he could turn it to account. 
 At this stage the people near Rieux seem ed to settle in against the arm-rests of 
their pews and make themselves as comfortable as they could. One of the big padded 
entrance doors was softly thudding in the wi nd, and someone got up to secure it. As a 
result, Rieux's attention wandered and he di d not follow well what Paneloux now went on 
to say. Apparently it came to this: we might try to explain the phenom enon of the plague, 
but, above all, should learn what it had to te ach us. Rieux gathered that, to the Father's 
thinking, there was rea lly nothing to explain. 
 His interest quickened when, in a more em phatic tone, the preacher said that there 
were some things we could grasp as touching God, and others we could not.  There was no doubt as to the existence of  good and evil and, as a rule, it was easy 
to see the difference between them. The difficu lty began when we looked into the nature 
of evil, and among things evil he included human suffering. Thus we had apparently 
needful pain, and apparently needless pain; we  had Don Juan cast into hell, and a child's 
death. For while it is right that a libertine should be struck down, we see no reason for a 
child's suffering. And, truth to tell, nothing was more important on earth than a child's 
suffering, the horror it inspires in us, and the reasons we must find to account for it. In 
other manifestations of life God made things  easy for us and, thus far, our religion had no merit. But in this respect He put us, so to sp eak, with our backs to the wall. Indeed, we all 
were up against the wall that plague had built around us, and in its lethal shadow we must 
work out our salvation. He, Father Paneloux, re fused to have recourse to simple devices 
enabling him to scale that wall. Thus he might easily have assured them that the child's 
sufferings would be compensated for by an eter nity of bliss awaiting him. But how could 
he give that assurance whe n, to tell the truth, he knew not hing about it? For who would 
dare to assert that eterna l happiness can compensate for a single moment's human 
suffering? He who asserted that would not be a true Christian, a follower of the Master who knew all the pangs of suffering in his body and his soul. No, he, Father Paneloux, 
would keep faith with that great symbol of all suffering, the tortured body on the Cross; 
he would stand fast, his back to the wall, and face honestly the te rrible problem of a 
child's agony. And he would boldly say to t hose who listened to hi s words today: "My 
brothers, a time of testing has come for us all. We must believe everything or deny 
everything. And who among you, I ask, w ould dare to deny everything?" 
 It crossed Rieux's mind that Father Pane loux was dallying with heresy in speaking 
thus, but he had no time to follow up the though t. The preacher was declaring vehemently 
that this uncompromising duty laid on the Christian was at once his ruling virtue and his 
privilege. He was well aware that certai n minds, schooled to a more indulgent and 
conventional morality, might well be dismaye d, not to say outraged, by the seemingly 
excessive standard of Christian virtue about which he was going to speak. But religion in 
a time of plague could not be the religion of  every day. While God might accept and even 
desire that the soul should ta ke its ease and rejoice in happi er times, in periods of extreme 
calamity He laid extreme demands on it. Thus  today God had vouchsafed to His creatures 
an ordeal such that they must acquire and practice the greatest of all virtues: that of the 
All or Nothing.  Many centuries previously a profane writer had claimed to  reveal a secret of the 
Church by declaring that purgatory did not exis t. He wished to conve y that there could be 
no half measures, there was only the alternativ e between heaven and hell; you were either 
saved or damned. That, according to Panel oux, was a heresy that could spring only from 
a blind, disordered soul. Nevertheless, there may well have been periods of history when 
purgatory could not be hoped for; periods when  it was impossible to speak of venial sin. 
Every sin was deadly, and any indifference criminal. It was all or it was nothing. 
 The preacher paused, and Rieux heard mo re clearly the whistling of the wind 
outside; judging by the sounds that came in be low the closed doors, it had risen to storm 
pitch. Then he heard Father Paneloux's voice again. He was saying that the total 
acceptance of which he had been speaking wa s not to be taken in the limited sense 
usually given to the words; he was not thinking of mere resignation or even of that harder 
virtue, humility. It involved humiliation, but a humiliation to which the person humiliated 
gave full assent. True, the agony of a child was humiliating to the heart and to the mind. But that was why we had to come to term s with it. And that, too, was why, and here 
Paneloux assured those present th at it was not easy to say what  he was about to say, since 
it was God's will, we, too, should will it. Thus and thus only the Christian could face the 
problem squarely and, scorning subterfuge, pierce to the heart of the supreme issue, the 
essential choice. And his choice would be to believe everything, so as not to be forced 
into denying everything. Like  those worthy women who, afte r learning that buboes were 
the natural issues th rough which the body cast out infect ion, went to their church and prayed: "Please, God, give him buboes," thus the Christian should yield himself wholly to 
the divine will, even though it passed his understanding. It was wrong to say: "This I 
understand, but that I cannot accept"; we must go straight to the heart of that which is unacceptable, precisely because it is thus that we are constrained to make our choice. The sufferings of children were our bread of affliction, but without  this bread our souls would 
die of spiritual hunger.  The shuffling sounds which usually followed the moment when the preacher paused were beginning to make themselves  heard when, unexpectedly, he raised his 
voice, making as if to put himself in his hear ers' place and ask what then was the proper 
course to follow. He made no doubt that the ugly word "fat alism" would be applied to 
what he said. Well, he would not boggle at the word, provided he were allowed to qualify it with the adjective "activ e." Needless to say, there was no question of imitating the 
Abyssinian Christians of whom he had spoke n previously. Nor should one even think of 
acting like those Persians who in time of pl ague threw their infected garments on the 
Christian sanitary workers and loudly calle d on Heaven to give the plague to these 
infidels who were trying to avert a pestil ence sent by God. But, on the other hand, it 
would be no less wrong to imitate the monks at Cairo who, when plague was raging in 
the town, distributed the Host w ith pincers at the Mass, so as  to avoid contact with wet, 
warm mouths in which infection might be la tent. The plague-stricken Persians and the 
monks were equally at fault. For the former a child's agony did not count; with the latter, on the contrary, the natural dread of suffering ranked highest in thei r conduct. In both 
cases the real problem had been shirked; th ey had closed their ears to God's voice. 
 But, Paneloux continued, there were ot her precedents of which he would now 
remind them. If the chronicles of the Black Death at Marseille were to be trusted, only 
four of the eighty-one monks in the Mercy Monastery survived the epidemic. And of 
these four three took to flight . Thus far the chronicler, and it was not his task to tell us 
more than the bare facts. But when he read  that chronicle, Fath er Paneloux had found his 
thoughts fixed on that monk who stayed on by hi mself, despite the death of his seventy-
seven companions, and, above all, despite the example of his three brothers who had fled. 
And, bringing down his fist on the edge of th e pulpit, Father Paneloux cried in a ringing 
voice:  "My brothers, each one of us must be the one who stays!" There was no question of not taking precautions or failing to comply with the orders wisely promulgated for the 
public weal in the disorders of a pestilence. Nor should we listen to certain moralists who 
told us to sink on our knees and give up th e struggle. No, we should go forward, groping 
our way through the darkness, stumbling perhap s at times, and try to do what good lay in 
our power. As for the rest, we must hold fast, trusting in the divine goodness, even as to 
the deaths of little children, a nd not seeking personal respite. 
 At this point Father Paneloux evoked the august figure of Bishop Belzunce during 
the Marseille plague. He reminded his hearers how, toward the close of the epidemic, the 
Bishop, having done all that it behooved him, shut himself up in his palace, behind high 
walls, after laying in a stock of food and drink. With a sudde n revulsion of feeling, such 
as often comes in times of extreme tribulat ion, the inhabitants of Marseille, who had 
idolized him hitherto, now turned against him, piled up corpses round his house in order 
to infect it, and even flung bodies over the wall s to make sure of his death. Thus in a 
moment of weakness the Bishop had proposed to  isolate himself from the outside world, and, lo and behold, corpses rained down on his head! This had a lesson for us all; we 
must convince ourselves that th ere is no island of escape in ti me of plague. No, there was 
no middle course. We must accep t the dilemma and choose either  to hate God or to love 
God. And who would dare to choose to hate Him?  "My brothers", the preacher's tone show ed he was nearing the conclusion of his 
sermon, "the love of God is a hard love. It demands total self-surre nder, disdain of our 
human personality. And yet it alone can reco ncile us to suffering and the deaths of 
children, it alone can justify them, since we cannot understand them, and we can only make God's will ours. That is the hard less on I would share with you today. That is the 
faith, cruel in men's eyes, and crucial in God' s, which we must ever strive to compass. 
We must aspire beyond ourselves toward that  high and fearful vision. And on that lofty 
plane all will fall into place, all discords be resolved, and truth flash forth from the dark 
cloud of seeming injustice. Thus in some chur ches of the south of France plague victims 
have lain sleeping many a centu ry under the flagstones of the chancel, and priests now 
speak above their tombs, and the divine me ssage they bring to men rises from that 
charnel, to which, nevert heless, children have co ntributed their share." 
 When Rieux was preparing to leave the church a violent gust swept up the nave 
through the half-open doors a nd buffeted the faces of the departing congregation. It 
brought with it a smell of rain, a tang of drenched sidewalks, warning them of the 
weather they would encounter outside. An  old priest and a young deacon who were 
walking immediately in front of Rieux had much difficulty in keeping their headdress from blowing away. But this did not preven t the elder of the tw o from discussing the 
sermon they had heard. He paid tribute to th e preacher's eloquence, but the boldness of 
thought Paneloux had shown gave him pause. In his opinion the sermon had displayed 
more uneasiness than real power, and at Pane loux's age a priest had no business to feel 
uneasy. The young deacon, his head bowed to prot ect his face from the wind, replied that 
he saw much of the Father, had followed th e evolution of his views, and believed his 
forthcoming pamphlet would be bolder still; indeed it might well be refused the imprimatur.  "You don't mean to say so! What's the main idea?" asked the old priest.  They were now in the Cathedral square and for some moments the roar of the wind made it impossible for the younger man to speak. When there was a slight lull, he 
said briefly to his companion:  "That it's illogical for a pr iest to call in a doctor." 
 Tarrou, when told by Rieux what Paneloux had said, remarked that he'd known a priest who had lost his faith during the wa r, as the result of seeing a young man's face 
with both eyes destroyed.  "Paneloux is right," Tarrou continued. "Whe n an innocent youth can have his eyes 
destroyed, a Christian should eith er lose his faith or consent to having his eyes destroyed. 
Paneloux declines to lose his faith, and he w ill go through with it to the end. That's what 
he meant to say."  It may be that this remark of Tarrou's throws some light on the regrettable events 
which followed, in the course of which the pr iest's conduct seemed inexplicable to his 
friends. The reader will judge for himself.  A few days after the sermon Paneloux had to move out of his rooms. It was a time when many people were obliged to change their residence owing to the new conditions created by the plague. Thus Tarrou, when his hotel was requisitioned, had gone to live 
with Rieux, and now the Father had to vacate the lodgings provided for him by his Order and stay in the house of a pious old lady who had so far escaped the epidemic. During the 
process of moving, Paneloux had been feeling more run down than ever, mentally as well 
as physically. And it was this that put him in the bad books of his hostess. One evening 
when she was enthusiastically vaunting the merits of St. Odilia's prophecies, the priest betrayed a slight impatience, due probably to  fatigue. All his subse quent efforts to bring 
the good lady round to, anyhow, a state of bene volent neutrality came to nothing. He had 
made a bad impression and it went on rankli ng. So each night on his way to his bedroom, 
where almost all the furniture was dotted with  crochet covers, he had to contemplate the 
back of his hostess seated in her drawing-room  and carry away with him a memory of the 
sour "Good night, Father," she flung at him over her shoulder. It was on one such evening 
that he felt, like a flood bursting the dikes, th e turbulent onrush in his wrists and temples 
of the fever latent in his blood for several days past.  The only available account of what follo wed comes from the lips of the old lady. 
 Next morning she rose early, as was her wont. After an hour or so, puzzled at not 
seeing the Father leave his room, she brought herself, not without some hesitation, to 
knock at his door. She found him still in bed af ter a sleepless night. He had difficulty in 
breathing and looked more flushed than usual. She had suggested most politely (as she put it) that a doctor should be called in, but her suggestion had been brushed aside with a 
curtness that she described as  "quite unmannerly." So she ha d no alternative but to. leave 
the room. Later in the morning the Father rang and asked if he could see her. He 
apologized for his lack of courtesy and assure d her that what he wa s suffering from could 
not be plague, as he had none of the symptoms; it was no more than a passing 
indisposition. The lady replied with dignity that her suggest ion had not been prompted by 
any apprehension of that sort, she took no thought for her personal security, which was in 
God's hands, but that she felt a certain measur e of responsibility for the Father's welfare 
while he was under her roof. When he said no thing, his hostess, wish ing (according to her 
account) to do her duty by him, offered to send for her doctor. Father  Paneloux told her 
not to trouble, adding some explanations that  seemed to the old lady incoherent, not to 
say nonsensical. 
 The only thing she gathered, and it was precisely this that appeared to her so incomprehensible, was that the Father refused to hear of a doctor's  visit because it was 
against his principles. Her impression was that her guest's mind had been unhinged by 
fever, and she confined herself to bringing him a cup of tea. 
 Resolutely mindful of th e obligations imposed on her by the situation, she visited 
the invalid regularly every two hours. Wh at struck her most about him was his 
restlessness, which continued throughout the day. He would throw off the blankets, then 
pull them back, and he kept running his hand over his forehead, which was glistening 
with sweat. Every now and then he sat up in be d and tried to clear his throat with a thick, 
grating cough, which sounded almost like retchi ng. At these moments he seemed to be 
vainly struggling to force up from his lungs a clot of some semi-solid substance that was 
choking him. After each unavailing effort, he sank back, utterly exhausted, on the pillow. 
Then he would raise himself again a little and st are straight in front of him with a fixity 
even more dismaying than the paroxysms which had preceded it. Even now the old lady was reluctant to annoy her guest by calling in the doctor. After all,  it might be no more 
than an attack of fever, spectacu lar as were its manifestations. 
 However, in the afternoon she made anothe r attempt to talk to the priest, but she 
could get out of him no more than a few rambling phrases. She renewed her proposal to 
call in the doctor. Whereat Paneloux sat up and in a stifled voice emphatically declined to 
see a doctor. Under these circumstances it s eemed best to the old lady to wait till the 
following morning; if the Father's conditi on showed no more improvement she would 
ring up the number announced ten times daily on the radio by the Ransdoc Information 
Bureau. Still conscious of her obligations, she resolved to visit the invalid from time to 
time in the course of the night and give him any attention he might need. But after 
bringing him a decoction of herbal tea she decided to lie down for a while. Only at daybreak did she wake up, and then sh e hurried to the priest's room. 
 Father Paneloux was lying quite still; hi s face had lost its deep flush of the 
previous day and had now a deathly pallor, all the more impressive because the cheeks 
had kept their fullness. He was gazing up at the bead fringe of a lamp hanging above the 
bed. When the old lady came in he turned his head to her. As she quaintly put it, he 
looked as if he'd been severely thrashed all the night long, and more dead than alive. She 
was greatly struck by the apat hy of his voice when, on her as king how he was feeling, he 
replied that he was in a bad way, he did not need a doctor, and all he wished was to be 
taken to the hospital, so as to comply with the regulations. Panic-st ricken, she hurried to 
the telephone.  Rieux came at noon. After hearing what the old lady had to say he replied briefly 
that Paneloux was right, but it was probably t oo late. The Father welcomed him with the 
same air of complete indifference. Rieux exam ined him and was surprised to find none of 
the characteristic symptoms of bubonic or  pneumonic plague, except congestion and 
obstruction of the lungs. But his pulse was so weak and his general state so alarming that 
there was little hope of saving him.  "You have none of the specific symptoms of  the disease," Rieux told him. "But I 
admit one can't be sure, and I must isolate you."  The Father smiled queerly, as if for polit eness' sake, but said nothing. Rieux left 
the room to telephone, then came back and looked at the priest.  "I'll stay with you," he said gently.  Paneloux showed a little mo re animation and a sort of warmth came back to his 
eyes when he looked up at the doctor. The n, speaking with such difficulty that it was 
impossible to tell if there was sadness in his voice, he said: 
 "Thanks. But priests can have no friends . They have given their all to God." 
 He asked for the crucifix that hung above the head of the bed; when given it, he turned away to gaze at it.  At the hospital Paneloux did not utter a word. He submitted passively to the treatment given him, but never let go of the crucifix. However, his case continued 
doubtful, and Rieux could not feel sure how to  diagnose it. For several weeks, indeed, the 
disease had seemed to make a point of c onfounding diagnoses. In the case of Paneloux, 
what followed was to show that th is uncertainty had no consequence. 
 His temperature rose. Throughout the day the cough grew louder, racking the enfeebled body. At last, at ni ghtfall, Father Paneloux brought  up the clot of matter that 
was choking him; it was red. Even at the heig ht of his fever Paneloux's eyes kept their blank serenity, and when, next morning, he was found dead, his body drooping over the 
bedside, they betrayed nothing. Against hi s name the index card  recorded: "Doubtful 
case." 
 All Souls' Day that year was very different  from what it had been in former years. 
True, the weather was seasonable; there had been sudden change, a nd the great heat had 
given place to mild autumnal air. As in other years a cool wind blew all day, and big 
clouds raced from one horizon to the other, trailing shadows over the houses upon which fell again, when they had passed, the pale gold light of a November sky. 
 The first waterproofs made their app earance. Indeed, one was struck by the 
number of glossy, rubberized garments to be  seen. The reason was that our newspapers 
had informed us that two hundred years pr eviously, during the great pestilences of 
southern Europe, the doctors wore oiled clothing as a safeguard against infection. The shops had seized this opportuni ty of unloading their stock of  out-of-fashion waterproofs, 
which their purchasers fondly hoped woul d guarantee immunity from germs. 
 But these familiar aspects of All Souls' Day could not make us forget that the cemeteries were left unvisited. In previ ous years the rather sickly smell of 
chrysanthemums had filled the streetcars, while long lines of women could be seen 
making pilgrimage to the places where members of the family were buried, to lay flowers 
on the graves. This was the day when they ma de amends for the ob livion and dereliction 
in which their dead had slept for many a long month.  But in the plague year people no longer  wished to be reminded of their dead. 
 Because, indeed, they were thinking all too much about them as it was. There was no more question of revisiting them with a shade of regret and much melancholy.  They were no longer the forsaken to whom, one day in the year, you came to 
justify yourself. They were in truders whom you would rather forget. This is why the Day 
of the Dead this year was tacitly but willfully ignored. As Cottard dryly remarked, Tarrou 
noted that the habit of irony was growing on him more and more, each day was for us a 
Day of the Dead.  And, in fact, the balefires of the pestil ence were blazing ever more merrily in the 
crematorium. It is true that the actua l number of deaths showed no increase. 
 But it seemed that plague had settled in  for good at its most virulent, and it took 
its daily toll of deaths  with the punctual zeal of a good civil servant. 
 Theoretically, and in the view of the au thorities, this was a hopeful sign. The fact 
that the graph after its long rising curve had flattened out seemed to many, Dr. Richard 
for example, reassuring. "The graph's good today," he would remark, rubbing his hands. To his mind the disease had reached what he  called high-water mark. Thereafter it could 
but ebb. He gave the credit of this to Dr.  Castel's new serum, which, indeed, had brought off some quite unlooked-for 
recoveries. While not dissenting, the old docto r reminded him that the future remained 
uncertain; history proved that epidemics have a way of recr udescing when least expected. 
The authorities, who had long been desirous of giving a fillip to the morale of the 
populace, but had so far been prevented by the plague from doing so, now proposed to convene a meeting of the medical corps a nd ask for an announcement on the subject. 
Unfortunately, just before the meeting was due to take place, Dr. Richard, too, was 
carried off by the plague, then precisely at "high-water mark."  The effect of this regrettable event, which, sensational as it was, actually proved 
nothing, was to make our authorities swing back to pessimism as inconsequently as they had previously indulged in optimism. As for Ca stel, he confined himself to preparing his 
serums with the maximum of care. By this time no public place or building had escaped conversion into a hospital or quarantine camp with the exception of the Prefect's offices, 
which were needed for administrative purpos es and committee meetings. In a general 
way, however, owing to the relative stability  of the epidemic at this time, Rieux's 
organizations were still able to cope with  the situation. Though wo rking constantly at 
high pressure, the doctors and their helpers we re not forced to cont emplate still greater 
efforts. All they had to do was to carry on automatically, so to speak, their all but 
superhuman task. The pneumonic type of infection, cases of which had already been detected, was now spreading all over the town ; one could almost believe that the high 
winds were kindling and fanning its flames in  people's chests. The victims of pneumonic 
plague succumbed much more quickly, af ter coughing up blood-stained sputum. This 
new form of the epidemic looked like being mo re contagious as well as even more fatal. 
However, the opinions of experts had always been divided on this matter. For greater 
safety all sanitary workers wore masks of ster ilized muslin. On the face of it, the disease 
should have extended its ravages. But, the cases of bubonic plague showing a decrease, 
the death-rate remained constant.  Meanwhile the authorities had another cause for anxiety in the difficulty of 
maintaining the food-supply. Profiteers were  taking a hand and purveying at enormous 
prices essential foodstuffs not available in the shops. The result was that poor families 
were in great straits, while the rich went  short of practically nothing. Thus, whereas 
plague by its impartial ministrations s hould have promoted equality among our 
townsfolk, it now had the opposite effect and, tha nks to the habitual conflict of cupidities, 
exacerbated the sense of injustice rankling in men's hearts. They were assured, of course, 
of the inerrable equality of death, but nobody wanted that kind of equality. 
 Poor people who were feeling the pinch thought still more nosta lgically of towns 
and villages in the near-by countryside , where bread was cheap and life without 
restrictions. Indeed, th ey had a natural if illogical fee ling that they should have been 
permitted to move out to these happier pl aces. The feeling was embodied in a slogan 
shouted in the streets and chal ked up on walls: "Bread or fr esh air!" This half-ironical 
battle-cry was the signal for some demonstr ations that, though easily repressed, made 
everyone aware that an ugly mood was developing among us.  The newspapers, needless to say, complie d with the instructions given them: 
optimism at all costs. If one was to believe what one read in them, our populace was 
giving "a fine example of courage and composure." But in a town thrown back upon itself, in which nothing could be kept secret, no one had illusions about the "example" given by the public. To form a correct idea a bout the courage and composure talked about 
by our journalists you had only to visit one of  the quarantine depots or isolation camps 
established by our authorities. As it so happens, the narrator, being fully occupied 
elsewhere, had no occasion to visit any of th em, and must fall back on Tarrou's diary for 
a description of the cond itions in these places. 
 Tarrou gives an account of a visit he made, accompanied by Rambert, to the camp located in the municipal stadium.  The stadium lies on the outskirts of the town, between a street along which runs a 
car line and a stretch of wast e land extending to the extreme edge of the plateau on which 
Oran is built. It was already surrounded by high concrete walls and all that was needed to 
make escape practically impossible was to post sentries at the four entrance gates. The 
walls served another purpose: they screened the unfortunates in quarantine from the view 
of people on the road.  Against this advantage may be set the f act that the inmates could hear all day, 
though they could not see them, the passing streetcars, and recognize by the increased 
volume of sound coming from the road the hours when people had knocked off work or were going to it. And this brought home to them that the life from which they were debarred was going on as before, within a few yards of them, and that those high walls parted two worlds as alien to each other as two different planets.  Tarrou and Rambert chose a Sunday afternoon for their visit to the stadium. They 
were accompanied by Gonzales, the football-pl ayer, with whom Rambert had kept in 
contact and who had let himself be persuade d into undertaking, in rotation with others, 
the surveillance of the camp. This visit was to enable Rambert to introduce Gonzales to 
the camp commandant. When they met that afternoon, Gonzales's first remark was that this was exactly the time when, before the pla gue, he used to start getting into his football 
togs. Now that the sports fields had been requisitioned, all that was of the past, and 
Gonzales was feeling, and showed it, at a lo ose end. This was one of the reasons why he 
had accepted the post proposed by Rambert, but he made it a condition that he was to be on duty during week-ends only.  The sky was overcast and, glancing up at it , Gonzales observed regretfully that a 
day like this, neither too hot nor rainy, would have been perfect for a game. 
 And then he fell to conjuring up, as best he could, the once familiar smell of embrocation in the dressing-rooms, the stands crowded with people, th e colored shirts of 
the players, showing up brightly against the tawny soil, the lemons at intermission or 
bottled lemonade that titillated parched th roats with a thousand refreshing pin-pricks. 
Tarrou also records how on the way, as they  walked the shabby outer streets, the 
footballer gave kicks to  all the small loose stones. His object was to shoot them into the 
sewer-holes of the gutters, and whenever he did this, he would shout: "Goal!" When he 
had finished his cigarette he spat the stub in front of him and tried to catch it on his toe 
before it touched the ground. Some children were  playing near the stadium, and when one 
of them sent a ball toward the three men, Gonzales went out of his way to return it neatly. 
 On entering the stadium they found the sta nds full of people. The field was dotted 
with several hundred red tents, inside whic h one had glimpses of bedding and bundles of 
clothes or rugs. The stands had been kept open for the use of the internees in hot or rainy 
weather. But it was a rule of the camp that everyone must be in his tent at sunset. 
Shower-baths had been installed under the st ands, and what used to be the players' 
dressing-rooms converted into offices and infirm aries. The majority of  the inmates of the 
camp were sitting about on the stands. Some, however, were strolli ng on the touchlines, 
and a few, squatting at the entrances of their tents, were listlessly contemplating the scene 
around them. In the stands many of those slumped on the wooden tiers had a look of 
vague expectancy.  "What do they do with themselves all day?" Tarrou asked Rambert.  "Nothing."  Almost all, indeed, had empty hands and idly dangling arms. Another curious 
thing about this multitude of derelicts was its silence. 
 "When they first came there was such a din you couldn't hear yourself speak," 
 Rambert said. "But as the days went  by they grew quiet er and quieter." 
 In his notes Tarrou gives wh at to his mind would explain this change. He pictures 
them in the early days bundled together in the tents, listening to  the buzz of flies, 
scratching themselves, and, whenever they found an obliging liste ner, shrilly voicing 
their fear or indignation. But when the cam p grew overcrowded, fewer and fewer people 
were inclined to play the part of sympatheti c listener. So they had no choice but to hold 
their peace and nurse their mistrust of ev erything and everyone. One had, indeed, a 
feeling that suspicion was falling, dewlike, from  the grayly shining sky over the brick-red 
camp.  Yes, there was suspicion in the eyes of  all. Obviously, they  were thinking, there 
must be some good reason for the isolation inflicted on them, and they had the air of 
people who are puzzling over their problem a nd are afraid. Everyone Tarrou set eyes on 
had that vacant gaze and was vi sibly suffering from the complete break with all that life 
had meant to him. And since they could not be  thinking of their death all the time, they 
thought of nothing. They were on vacation.  "But worst of all," Tarrou writes, "is that they're forgotten, and they know it.  Their friends have forgotten them because  they have other things to think about, 
naturally enough. And those they love have forg otten them because all their energies are 
devoted to making schemes and taking steps to get them out of the camp. And by dint of 
always thinking about these schemes and st eps they have ceased thinking about those 
whose release they're trying to secure. And that, too, is natural enough. In fact, it comes 
to this: nobody is capable of r eally thinking about anyone, even in the worst calamity. For 
really to think about someone means thinking about that person every minute of the day, 
without letting one's thoughts be diverted by anything, by meals, by a fly that settles on 
one's cheek, by household duties, or by a sudde n itch somewhere. But there are always 
flies and itches. That's why life is difficu lt to live. And these people know it only too 
well." 
 The camp manager came up; a gentleman named Othon, he said, would like to see 
them. Leaving Gonzales in the office, he le d the others to a corner of the grandstand, 
where they saw M. Othon sitting by hims elf. He rose as they approached. 
 The magistrate was dressed exactly as in  the past and still wore a stiff collar. 
 The only changes Tarrou noted were that the tufts of hair over his temples were 
not brushed back and that one of his shoelaces was undone. M. Othon appeared very tired and not once did he look his visitors in the f ace. He said he was glad to see them and 
requested them to thank Dr. Rieux for all he had done.  Some moments of silence en sued, then with an effort the magistrate spoke again: 
 "I hope Jacques did not suffer too much."  This was the first time Tarrou heard him utter his son's name, and he realized that something had changed. The sun was setting and, flooding through a rift in the clouds, the level rays raked the stands, tingeing their faces with  a yellow glow. 
 "No," Tarrou said. "No, I couldn't really say he suffered."  When they took their leave, the magist rate was still gazing toward the light.  They called in at the office to sa y good-by to Gonzales, whom they found 
studying the duty roster. The footballer was laughing when he shook hands with them. 
 "Anyhow, I'm back in the good old dre ssing-room," he chuckled. "That's 
something to go on with." 
 Soon after, when the camp manager was seeing Tarrou and Rambert out, they 
heard a crackling noise coming from the stands . A moment later the loud-speakers, which 
in happier times served to announce the results of games or to introduce the teams, informed the inmates of the camp that they we re to go back to their tents for the evening 
meal. Slowly everyone filed off the stands and shuffled toward the tents. After all were 
under canvas two small electric trucks, of the kind used for transporting baggage on 
railroad platforms, began to wend their way between the tents. While the occupants held 
forth their arms, two ladles plunged into th e two big caldrons on each truck and neatly 
tipped their contents into the waiting mess-kits . Then the truck moved on to the next tent. 
 "Very efficient," Tarrou remarked.  The camp manager beamed as he shook hands.  "Yes, isn't it? We're great believ ers in efficiency in this camp." 
 Dusk was falling. The sky had cleared and th e camp was bathed in cool, soft light. 
Through the hush of evening came a faint tinkle of spoons and plates.  Above the tents bats were circling, vanishing abruptly into the darkness. A streetcar squealed on a switch outside the walls.  "Poor Monsieur Othon!" Tarrou murmured as the gate closed behind them. "One would like to do something to help him. But how can you help a judge?" 
 There were other camps of much the same  kind in the town, but the narrator, for 
lack of firsthand information and in deferen ce to veracity, has nothi ng to add about them. 
This much, however, he can say; the mere existence of these camps, the smell of crowded humanity coming from them, the baying of their loud-speakers in the dusk, the air of 
mystery that clung about them, and the dread  these forbidden places inspired told 
seriously on our fellow citizens' morale and added to the general nervousness and 
apprehension. Breaches of the peace a nd minor riots became more frequent. 
 As November drew to a close, the mornings turned much colder. Heavy 
downpours had scoured the streets and washed th e sky clean of clouds. In the mornings a 
weak sunlight bathed the town in a col d, sparkling sheen. The air warmed up, however, 
as night approached. It was such a night that Tarrou chose for telling something of 
himself to Dr. Rieux.  After a particularly tiring day, about te n o'clock Tarrou proposed to the doctor 
that they should go together for the evening visit to Rieux's old asthma patient. There was 
a soft glow above the housetops in the Old Town and a light breeze fanned their faces at the street crossings. Coming from the silent streets, they found the old man's loquacity 
rather irksome at first. He launched into a long harangue to the eff ect that some folks 
were getting fed up, that it was always the same people had all the jam, and things 
couldn't go on like that indefinitely, one day th ere'd be, he rubbed his hands, "a fine old 
row." He continued expatiating on this theme all the time the doctor was attending to 
him.  They heard footsteps overhead. Notici ng Tarrou's upward glance, the old woman 
explained that it was the girl s from next door walking on th e terrace. She added that one 
had a lovely view up there, and th at as the terraces in this part of the town often joined up with the next one on one side, the women c ould visit their neighbor s without having to go 
into the street. 
 "Why not go up and have a look?" the old man suggested. "You'll get a breath of nice fresh air."  They found nobody on the terrace, only three empty chairs. On one side, as far as 
eye could reach, was a row of terraces, the most remote of which abutted on a dark, 
rugged mass that they recognized as the hill ne arest the town. On the other side, spanning 
some streets and the unseen harbor, their gaze came to rest on the horizon, where sea and sky merged in a dim, vibrant grayness. Beyond a black patch that they knew to be the 
cliffs a sudden glow, whose source they could no t see, sprang up at re gular intervals; the 
lighthouse at the entrance of th e fairway was still functioning for the benefit of ships that, 
passing Oran's unused harbor, went on to ot her ports along the coas t. In a sky swept 
crystal-clear by the night wind, the stars showed like silver flakes, tarnished now and then by the yellow gleam of the revolving light. Perfumes of spice and warm stone were wafted on the breeze.  Everything was very still.  "A pleasant spot," said Rie ux as he lowered himself into a chair. "You'd think that 
plague had never found its way up here."  Tarrou was gazing seawards, his back to the doctor.  "Yes," he replied after a moment's  silence, "it's good to be here." 
 Then, settling into the chair beside Rieux, he fixed his eyes on his face. Three times the glow spread up the sky and died aw ay. A faint clatter of crockery rose from a 
room opening on the street below. A door banged somewhere in the house.  "Rieux," Tarrou said in a quite ordinary  tone, "do you realize that you've never 
tried to find out anything about me, the man I am? Can I regard you as a friend?" 
 "Yes, of course, we're friends; only so far we haven't had much time to show it." 
 "Good. That gives me confidence. Suppose we now take an hour off, for 
friendship?"  Rieux smiled by way of answer.  "Well, here goes!"  There was a long faint hiss some streets off, the sound of a car speeding on the wet pavement. It died away; then some va gue shouts a long way off broke the stillness 
again. Then, like a dense veil slowly falling fr om the starry sky on the two men, silence 
returned. Tarrou had moved and now was sitt ing on the parapet, facing Rieux, who was 
slumped back in his chair. A ll that could be seen of him was a dark, bulky form outlined 
against the glimmering sky. He had much to tell; what follows gives it more or less in his own words.  "To make things simpler, Rieux, let me begin by saying I had plague already, long before I came to this town and encountered it here. Which is tantamount to saying I'm like everybody else. Only there are some people who don't know it, or fe el at ease in that 
condition; others know and want to get out of it.  Personally, I've always wanted to get out of it.  "When I was young I lived with the idea of my innocence; that is to say, with no 
idea at all. I'm not the self-tormenting kind of  person, and I made a suitable start in life. I 
brought off everything I set my hand to, I moved at ease in the field of the intellect, I got on excellently with women, and if I had occasio nal qualms, they passed as lightly as they 
came. Then one day I started thinking. 
 And now?  "I should tell you I wasn't poor in my young days, as you were. My father had an 
important post, he was prosecuting attorney; bu t to look at him, you'd never have guessed 
it; he appeared, and was, a kindly, good-natured man. My mother was a simple, rather shy woman, and I've always loved her greatly; bu t I'd rather not talk about her. My father 
was always very kind to me, and I even th ink he tried to understand me. He wasn't a 
model husband. I know that now, but I can't say it shocks me particularly. Even in his 
infidelities he behaved as one could count on hi s behaving and never gave  rise to scandal. 
In short, he wasn't at all orig inal and, now he's dead, I reali ze that, while no plaster saint, 
he was a very decent man as men go. He kept the middle way, that's all; he was the type 
of man for whom one has an aff ection of the mild but steady order, which is the kind that 
wears best.  "My father had one peculiarity; the bi g railway directory was his bedside book. 
Not that he often took a train;  almost his only journeys were  to Brittany, where he had a 
small country house to which we went every summer. But he was a walking timetable; he could tell you the exact times of  departure and arrival of the Paris-Berlin expresses; how 
to get from Lyon to Warsaw, which trains to take and at what hours;  the precise distance 
between any two capital cities you might men tion. Could you tell me offhand how to get 
from Briancon to Chamonix? Even a station- master would scratch his head, I should say. 
Well, my father had the answer pat. Almost every evening he enlarged his knowledge of the subject, and he prided himself on it. Th is hobby of his much am used me; I would put 
complicated travel problems to him and ch eck his answers afterw ards by the railway 
directory. They were invariably correct. My  father and I got on together excellently, 
thanks largely to these railway games we played in the evenings; I was exactly the 
audience he needed, attentive and appr eciative. Personally I regarded this 
accomplishment of his as quite as admirabl e in its ways as most accomplishments. 
 "But I'm letting my tongue run away with me and attributing too much importance to that worthy man. Actually he played only an  indirect role in the great change of heart 
about which I want to tell you. Th e most he did to me was to touch off a train of thoughts. 
When I was seventeen my father asked me to come to hear him speak in court. There was 
a big case on at the assizes, and probably he thought I'd see him to his best advantage. 
Also I suspect he hoped I'd be duly impressed by the pomp and ceremony of the law and encouraged to take up his profession. I could tell he was keen on my going, and the prospect of seeing a side of my  father's character so differe nt from that we saw at home 
appealed to me. Those were absolutely the on ly reasons I had for going to the trial. What 
happened in a court had always seemed to me as natural, as much in  the order of things, 
as a military parade on the Fourteenth of Ju ly or a school speech day. My notions on the 
subject were purely abstract, and I'd never given it serious thought. 
 "The only picture I carried away with me of that day's proceedings was a picture 
of the criminal. I have little doubt he was gu ilty, of what crime is no great matter. That 
little man of about thirty, with  sparse, sandy hair, seemed so eager to confess everything, 
so genuinely horrified at what  he'd done and what was going to be done with him, that 
after a few minutes I had eyes for nothing a nd nobody else. He looked like a yellow owl 
scared blind by too much light. His tie was slig htly awry, he kept biting his nails, those of one hand only, his right.... I needn't go on, need I? You've understood, he was a living 
human being.  "As for me, it came on me suddenly, in a flash of understanding; until then I'd 
thought of him only under his commonplace official designation, as 'the defendant.' And though I can't say I quite forgot my father, some thing seemed to grip my vitals at that 
moment and riveted all my attention on the l ittle man in the dock. I hardly heard what 
was being said; I only knew th at they were set on killing that living man, and an uprush 
of some elemental instinct, like a wave, had swept me to his side. And I did not really 
wake up until my father rose to address the court.  "In his red gown he was another man, no longer genial or good-natured; his 
mouth spewed out long, turgid ph rases like an endless stream of  snakes. I realized he was 
clamoring for the prisoner's d eath, telling the jury that they owed it to society to find him 
guilty; he went so far as to demand that the man should have his head cut off. Not exactly 
in those words, I admit. 'He must pay the supreme penalty,' was the formula. But the difference, really, was slight, a nd the result the same. He had the head he asked for. Only 
of course it wasn't he who did the actual j ob. I, who saw the whole business through to its 
conclusion, felt a far closer, far more terrifyi ng intimacy with that wretched man than my 
father can ever have felt. Nevertheless, it fell to him, in the course of his duties, to be 
present at what's politely termed the prisoner's last moments, but what would be better called murder in its most despicable form.  "From that day on I couldn't even see th e railway directory without a shudder of 
disgust. I took a horrified interest in legal proceedings, death sentences, executions, and I 
realized with dismay that my father must have often witnessed those brutal murders, on 
the days when, as I'd noticed without guessing wh at it meant, he rose very early in the 
morning. I remembered he used to wind his alarm-clock on those occasions, to make sure. I didn't dare to broach the subject w ith my mother, but I watched her now more 
closely and saw that their life in comm on had ceased to mean anything, she had 
abandoned hope. That helped me to 'forgive he r,' as I put it to myse lf at the time. Later 
on, I learned that there'd been nothing to forgive; she'd been quite poor until her marriage, and poverty had taught her resignation.  "Probably you're expecting me to tell you that I left home at once. No, I stayed on many months, nearly a year, in fact. Then one evening my father asked for the alarm-
clock as he had to get up earl y. I couldn't sleep that night. Next day, when he came home, 
I'd gone.  "To cut a long story short, I had a letter from my fath er, who had set inquiries on 
foot to find me, I went to see him, and, w ithout explaining my r easons, told him quite 
calmly that I'd kill myself if he forced me to return. He wound up by letting me have my 
way, he was, as I've said, a kindly man at bottom, gave me a lecture on the silliness of wanting to 'live my life' (that was how he accounted for my conduct and I didn't undeceive him), and plenty of good advice. I coul d see he really felt it deeply and it was 
an effort for him to keep back his tears. Subsequently, but quite a long time after that, I 
formed a habit of visiting my mother periodically, a nd I always saw him on these 
occasions. 1 imagine these infrequent meetings satisfied my father. Personally, I hadn't the least antipathy to him, only a little sadne ss of heart. When he died I had my mother 
come to live with me, and she'd still be with me if she were alive.  "I've had to dwell on my start in life, since for me it really was the start of 
everything. I'll get on more quickly now. I came to grips with poverty when I was 
eighteen, after an easy life till then. I tried all sorts of jobs, and I didn't do too badly. But my real interest in life was the death penalty; I wanted to sq uare accounts with that poor 
blind owl in the dock. So I became an agitator, as  they say. I didn't want to be pestiferous, 
that's all. To my mind the social order around me was base d on the death sentence, and 
by righting the established order I'd be fighti ng against murder. That was my view, others 
had told me so, and I still think that this be lief of mine was substantially true. I joined 
forces with a group of people I then liked, and indeed have never ceas ed to like. I spent 
many years in close co-operation with them, a nd there's not a country in Europe in whose 
struggles I haven't played a part. But that's another story.  "Needless to say, I knew that we, too, on occasion, passed sentences of death.  But I was told that these few deaths were inevitable for the building up of a new world in which murder would cease to be. Th at also was true up to a point, and maybe 
I'm not capable of standing fast where that order of truths is concerned. 
 Whatever the explanation, I hesitated. But then I remembered that miserable owl in the dock and it enabled me to keep on. Until the day when I was present at an execution, it was in Hungary, and exactly the sa me dazed horror that I'd experienced as a 
youngster made everything reel before my eyes.  "Have you ever seen a man shot by a firing-squad? No, of course not; the 
spectators are hand-picked and it's like a private party, you n eed an invitation. The result 
is that you've gleaned your ideas about it fr om books and pictures. A post, a blindfolded 
man, some soldiers in the offing. But the real thing isn't a bit like that. Do you know that 
the firing-squad stands only a yard and a half from the condemned man? Do you know 
that if the victim took two steps forward his chest would touch the rifles? Do you know 
that, at this short range, the soldiers concen trate their fire on the region of the heart and 
their big bullets make a hole into which you could thrust your fist? No, you didn't know 
all that; those are things that  are never spoken of. For the plague-stricken their peace of 
mind is more important than a human life. Decen t folks must be allowed to sleep easy o' 
nights, mustn't they? Really it would be shoc kingly bad taste to linger on such details, 
that's common knowledge. But personally I've ne ver been able to sleep well since then. 
The bad taste remained in my mouth and I've  kept lingering on the details, brooding over 
them.  "And thus I came to understand that I, anyhow, had had plague through all those 
long years in which, paradoxically enough, I'd believed with all my soul that I was 
fighting it. I learned that I had had an indirect hand in the deaths of thousands of people; 
that I'd even brought about their deaths by a pproving of acts and principles which could 
only end that way. Others did not seem em barrassed by such thoughts, or anyhow never 
voiced them of their own accord.  But I was different; what I'd come to know stuck in my gorge. I was with them and yet I was alone. When I spoke of these matters  they told me not to be so squeamish; I 
should remember what great issues were at stake. And they advan ced arguments, often 
quite impressive ones, to make me swallow what none the less I couldn't bring myself to 
stomach. I replied that the most eminent of  the plague-stricken, the men who wear red 
robes, also have excellent arguments to justify what they do, and once I admitted the 
arguments of necessity and force majeure put forward by the less eminent, I couldn't reject those of the eminent. To which they retorted that the sure st way of playing the 
game of the red robes was to leave to them  the monopoly of the death penalty. My reply 
to this was that if you gave in once, there wa s no reason for not conti nuing to give in. It 
seems to me that history has borne me out; today there's a sort of competition who will 
kill the most. They're all mad over murder and they couldn't stop killing men even if they 
wanted to. 
 "In any case, my concern was not with arguments. It was with the poor owl; with 
that foul procedure whereby dirty mouths stinking of plague told a fettered man that he was going to die, and scientific ally arranged things so that he should die, after nights and 
nights of mental torture while he waited to be murdered in cold blood. My concern was 
with that hole in a man's chest. And I told myself that meanwhile, so far anyhow as I was 
concerned, nothing in the world would induce me to accept any argument that justified such butcheries. Yes, I chose to be blindl y obstinate, pending the day when I could see 
my way more clearly.  "I'm still of the same mind. For many y ears I've been ashamed, mortally ashamed, 
of having been, even with the best intentions , even at many removes, a murderer in my 
turn. As time went on I merely learned that even those who were better than the rest 
could not keep themselves nowadays from killin g or letting others kill, because such is 
the logic by which they live; and that we can't stir a finger in this world without the risk 
of bringing death to somebody. Yes, I've been ashamed ever since; I have realized that 
we all have plague, and I have lost my peace.  And today I am still trying to find it; still 
trying to understand all those others and not  to be the mortal enemy of anyone. I only 
know that one must do what one can to cease being plague-stricken, and that's the only way in which we can hope for some peace or, failing that, a decent death. This, and only this, can bring relief to men and, if not save them, at least do them the least harm possible 
and even, sometimes, a little good. So that is  why I resolved to have no truck with 
anything which, directly or indi rectly, for good reasons or for bad, brings death to anyone 
or justifies others' putting him to death.  "That, too, is why this epidemic has taught me nothing new, except that I must 
fight it at your side. I know positively, yes, Rieux, I can say I know the world inside out, 
as you may see, that each of us has the pla gue within him; no one, no one on earth is free 
from it. And I know, too, that we must keep endless watch on ourselves  lest in a careless 
moment we breathe in somebody's  face and fasten the infection on him. What's natural is 
the microbe. All the rest, health, integrity, pu rity (if you like), is a product of the human 
will, of a vigilance that must never falte r. The good man, the man who infects hardly 
anyone, is the man who has the fewest lapses  of attention. And it needs tremendous will-
power, a never ending tension of the mind, to  avoid such lapses. Yes, Rieux, it's a 
wearying business, being plague-s tricken. But it's still more wearying to refuse to be it. 
That's why everybody in the world today looks so tired; everyone is mo re or less sick of 
plague. But that is also why some of us, those who want to get the plague out of their 
systems, feel such desperate weariness, a w eariness from which nothing remains to set us 
free except death.  "Pending that release, I know I have no place in the world of today; once I'd 
definitely refused to kill, I doomed myself to  an exile that can never end. I leave it to 
others to make history. I know, too, that I'm not qualified to pass judgment on those 
others. There's something lacki ng in my mental make-up, and its lack prevents me from being a rational murderer. So it's a deficienc y, not a superiority. But as things are, I'm 
willing to be as I am; I've learned modesty. 
 All I maintain is that on this earth there are pestilences and there are victims, and it's up to us, so far as possible, not to join forces with the pestilences. That may sound 
simple to the point of childis hness; I can't judge if it's simple, but I know it's true. You 
see, I'd heard such quantities of arguments, wh ich very nearly turned my head, and turned 
other people's heads enough to make them approve  of murder; and I'd co me to realize that 
all our troubles spring from our failure to us e plain, clean-cut language. So I resolved 
always to speak, and to act, quite clearly, as  this was the only wa y of setting myself on 
the right track. That's why I say there are pest ilences and there are victims; no more than 
that. If, by making that statement, I, too, become  a carrier of "the plague-germ, at least I 
don't do it willfully. I try, in short, to be an innocent murderer. You see, I've no great 
ambitions. "I grant we should add a third category:  that of the true healers. But it's a fact 
one doesn't come across many of them, and anyhow it must be a hard vocation. That's why I decided to take, in every predicament, th e victims' side, so as to reduce the damage 
done. Among them I can at least try to discove r how one attains to the third category; in 
other words, to peace."  Tarrou was swinging his leg, tapping the terrace lightly with his heel, as he 
concluded. After a short silence the doctor raised  himself a little in his chair and asked if 
Tarrou had an idea of the path to follow for attaining peace.  "Yes," he replied. "The path of sympathy."  Two ambulances were clanging in the di stance. The dispersed shouts they had 
been hearing off and on drew together on the outskirts of the tow n, near the stony hill, 
and presently there was a sound like a gunshot. Then silence fell again. 
 Rieux counted two flashes of the revolv ing light. The breeze freshened and a gust 
coming from the sea filled the air for a moment with the smell of brine. 
 And at the same time they clearly hear d the low sound of waves lapping the foot 
of the cliffs.  "It comes to this," Tarrou said almost cas ually; "what interest s me is learning how 
to become a saint."  "But you don't believe in God."  "Exactly! Can one be a sain t without God?, that's the problem, in fact the only 
problem, I'm up against today."  A sudden blaze sprang up above the place the shouts had come from and, stemming the wind-stream, a ru mor of many voices came to th eir ears. The blaze died 
down almost at once, leaving behind it only a dull red glow. Then in a break of the wind 
they distinctly heard some strident yells and the discharge of a gun, followed by the roar 
of an angry crowd. Tarrou stood up and liste ned, but nothing more could be heard. 
 "Another skirmish at the gates, I suppose." 
 "Well, it's over now," Rieux said.  Tarrou said in a low voice that it wa s never over, and there would be more 
victims, because that was in the order of things.  "Perhaps," the doctor answered. "But, you know, I feel more fellowship with the 
defeated than with saints. Heroism and sanctity don't really appeal to me, I imagine. What interests me is being a man."  "Yes, we're both after the same thing, but I'm less ambitious."  Rieux supposed Tarrou was jesting and turned  to him with a smile. But, faintly lit 
by the dim radiance falling from the sky, the f ace he saw was sad and earnest. There was 
another gust of wind and Rieux felt it warm on his skin. Tarrou gave himself a little 
shake. 
 "Do you know," he said, "what we now should do for friendship's sake?"  "Anything you like, Tarrou."  "Go for a swim. It's one of these harmless pleasures that even a saint-to-be can indulge in, don't you agree?" Rieux smiled again, and Tarrou continued: "With our 
passes, we can get out on the pier. Really, it's too damn silly living only in and for the plague. Of course, a man should fight for the vi ctims, but if he ceases caring for anything 
outside that, what's the use of his fighting?"  "Right," Rieux said. "Let's go."  Some minutes later the car drew up at th e harbor gates. The moon had risen and a 
milk-white radiance, dappled with shadows,  lay around them. Behind them rose the town, 
tier on tier, and from it came warm , fetid breaths of air that urged them toward the sea. 
After showing their passes to  a guard, who inspected them minutely, they crossed some 
open ground littered with casks, and headed towa rd the pier. The air here reeked of stale 
wine and fish. Just before they reached the pier a smell of iodine and seaweed announced 
the nearness of the sea and they clearly he ard the sound of waves breaking gently on the 
big stone blocks.  Once they were on the pier they saw the sea spread out before them, a gently heaving expanse of deep-piled velvet, supple a nd sleek as a creature of the wild. They sat 
down on a boulder facing the open. Slowly th e waters rose and sank, and with their 
tranquil breathing sudden oily gl ints formed and flickered over  the surface in a haze of 
broken lights. Before them the darkness stretche d out into infinity. Ri eux could feel under 
his hand the gnarled, weather-worn visage of the rocks, and a strange happiness 
possessed him. Turning to Tarrou, he caught a glimpse on his friend's face of the same happiness, a happiness that for got nothing, not even murder. 
 They undressed, and Rieux dived in first. After the first shock of cold had passed 
and he came back to the surf ace the water seemed tepid. When he had taken a few strokes 
he found that the sea was warm that night with the warmth of autumn seas that borrow from the shore the accumulated heat of the long days of summer. The movement of his 
feet left a foaming wake as he swam stead ily ahead, and the water slipped along his arms 
to close in tightly on his legs. A loud splash  told him that Tarrou had dived. Rieux lay on 
his back and stayed motionless, gazing up at the dome of sky lit by the stars and moon. He drew a deep breath. Then he heard a sound of beaten water, louder and louder, 
amazingly clear in the hollow silence of the night. Tarrou was coming up with him, he 
now could hear his breathing.  Rieux turned and swam level with his friend, timing his stroke to Tarrou's. But 
Tarrou was the stronger swimmer and Rieux had to  put on speed to keep up with him. For 
some minutes they swam side by side, with th e same zest, in the same rhythm, isolated 
from the world, at last free of the town and of the plague.  Rieux was the first to stop and they swam  back slowly, except at one point, where 
unexpectedly they found themselves caught in an ice-cold current. Their energy whipped 
up by this trap the sea had sprung on them, both struck out more vigorously.  They dressed and started back. Neither ha d said a word, but they were conscious 
of being perfectly at one, and the memory of  this night would be cherished by them both. 
When they caught sight of the plague watchm an, Rieux guessed that Tarrou, like himself, 
was thinking that the disease had given them  a respite, and this was good, but now they 
must set their shoulders to the wheel again. 
 Yes, the plague gave short shrift indee d, and they must set their shoulders to the 
wheel again. Throughout December it smoldered in the chests of our townsfolk, fed the 
fires in the crematorium, and peopled the cam ps with human jetsam. In short, it never 
ceased progressing with its char acteristically jerky but unfalte ring stride. The authorities 
had optimistically reckoned on the coming of wi nter to halt its pr ogress, but it lasted 
through the first cold spells wi thout the least remission. So th e only thing for us to do was 
to go on waiting, and since after a too long waiting one gives up waiting, the whole town 
lived as if it had no future.  As for Dr. Rieux, that brief hour of peace and friendship which had been granted him was not, and could not be , repeated. Yet another hospi tal had been opened, and his 
only converse was with his patients. However, he noticed a ch ange at this stage of the 
epidemic, now that the plague was assuming more and more the pneumonic form; the patients seemed, after their fashion, to be s econding the doctor. Instead of giving way to 
the prostration or the frenzies of the early peri od, they appeared to ha ve a clearer idea of 
where their interests lay and on their own initiative asked for what might be most 
beneficial. Thus they were always clamoring for something to  drink and insisted on being 
kept as warm as possible. And though the demands on him were as exhausting as before, Rieux no longer had the impression of putting up  a solitary fight; the patients were co-
operating. Toward the end of December he rece ived a letter from M. Othon, who was still 
in quarantine. The magistrate stated that hi s quarantine period was over; unfortunately the 
date of his admission to camp seemed to have been mislaid by the secretariat, and if he 
was still detained it was certainly due to a mistake.  His wife, recently released from quarant ine, had gone to the Prefect's office to 
protest and had been rudely treated; they had to ld her that the office never made mistakes. 
Rieux asked Rambert to look into the matter,  and a few days later M. Othon called on 
him. There had, in fact, been a mistake, and Rieux showed some indignation. But M. Othon, who had grown thinner, raised a limp, deprecating hand; weighing his words, he 
said that everyone could make mistakes. And the doctor thought to hi mself that decidedly 
something had changed.  "What will you do now, Monsieur Othon?" Rieux asked. "I suppose you have a pile of work awaiting you."  "Well, as a matter of fact, I'm putting in for some leave."  "I quite understand. You need a rest."  "It's not that. I want to go back to the camp."  Rieux couldn't believe his ears. "But you've only just come out of it!"  "I'm afraid I did not make myself clear . I'm told there are some voluntary workers 
from government offices in that camp." The ma gistrate rolled his round eyes a little and 
tried to smooth down a tuft of hair. "It w ould keep me busy, you see. And also, I know it 
may sound absurd, but I'd feel less separated from my little boy."  Rieux stared at him. Could it be that a sudden gentleness showed in those hard, 
inexpressive eyes? Yes, they had grow n misted, lost their steely glitter.  "Certainly," Rieux said. "Since th at's your wish, I'll fix it up for you." 
 The doctor kept his word; and the life of the plague-ridden town resumed its 
course until Christmas. Tarrou continued to br ing his quiet efficiency to bear on every 
problem. Rambert confided in the doctor that, with the connivance of the two young 
guards, he was sending letters to his wife and now and then receiving an answer. He 
suggested to Rieux that he s hould avail himself of this cl andestine channel, and Rieux 
agreed to do so. For the first time for many months he sat down to write a letter. He 
found it a laborious business, as if he were manipulating a language that he had forgotten. The letter was dispatched.  The reply was slow in coming. As for Cottard, he was prospering, making money hand over fist in small, somewhat shady transactions. With Grand, however, it was otherwise; the Christmas season did not seem to agree with him.  Indeed, Christmas that year had none of its old-time associations; it smacked of 
hell rather than of heaven. Empty, unlighted  shops, dummy chocolates or empty boxes in 
the confectioners' windows, streetcars laden with  listless, dispirited passengers, all was as 
unlike previous Christmastides as it well could be. In the past all the townspeople, rich 
and poor alike, indulged in seasonable festiv ity; now only a privileged few, those with 
money to burn, could do so, and they caroused in shamefast solitude in a dingy back shop 
or a private room. In the churches ther e were more supplications than carols. 
 You saw a few children, too young to realize what threatened them, playing in the frosty, cheerless streets. But no one dared to bid them welcome-in the God of former days, bringer of gifts, and old as human sorrow, yet new as the hopes of youth. There was no room in any heart but for a very old, gray hope, that hope which keeps men from 
letting themselves drift into death and is nothing but a dogged will to live. 
 Grand had failed to show up as usual on the previous evening. Feeling somewhat 
anxious, Rieux called at his place early in the morning, but he wasn't at home. 
 His friends were asked to keep a lookout  for him. At about eleven Rambert came 
to the hospital with the news that he'd had a distant glimpse of Grand, who seemed to be 
wandering aimlessly, "looking very queer." Unfort unately he had lost sight of him almost 
at once. Tarrou and the doctor set out in the car to hunt for Grand.  At noon Rieux stepped out of his car into the frozen air; he had just caught sight 
of Grand some distance away, his face glue d to a shop-window full of crudely carved 
wooden toys. Tears were steadily flowing down the old fellow's cheeks, and they wrung the doctor's heart, for he could understand th em, and he felt his own tears welling up in 
sympathy. A picture rose before him of that  scene of long ago, the youngster standing in 
front of another shop-window, like this one dressed for Christmas, and Jeanne turning toward him in a sudden access of emotion and saying how happy she was. He could guess that through the mists of the past years, from the depth of his fond despair, Jeanne's 
young voice was rising, echoing in Grand's ears.  And he knew, also, what the old man 
was thinking as his tears flowed, and he, Rie ux, thought it too: that a loveless world is a 
dead world, and always there comes an hour wh en one is weary of prisons, of one's work, 
and of devotion to duty, and all one craves for is a loved face, the warmth and wonder of a loving heart.  Grand saw the doctor's reflection in th e window. Still weeping, he turned and, 
leaning against the shop-front , watched Rieux approach. 
 "Oh, doctor, doctor!" He could say no more.  Rieux, too, couldn't speak; he made a vague, understanding gesture. At this 
moment he suffered with Grand's sorrow, a nd what filled his breast was the passionate 
indignation we feel when confront ed by the anguish all men share. 
 "Yes, Grand," he murmured. 
 "Oh, if only I could have time to write to  her! To let her know... and to let her be 
happy without remorse!"  Almost roughly Rieux took Grand's arm and drew him forw ard. Grand did not 
resist and went on muttering broken phrases.  "Too long! It's lasted too long. All the time one's wanting to let oneself go, and 
then one day one has to. Oh, doctor, I know I look a quiet sort, just like anybody else. But 
it's always been a terrible effort only to be , just normal. And now, well, even that's too 
much for me."  He stopped dead. He was trembling viol ently, his eyes were  fever-bright. Rieux 
took his hand; it was burning hot.  "You must go home."  But Grand wrenched himself free and star ted running. After a few steps he halted 
and stretched out his arms, swaying to and fro. Then he spun round on himself and fell flat on the pavement, his face stained with the tears that went on flowing. Some people 
who were approaching stopped abruptly and watched the scene from a little way off, not daring to come nearer. Rieux had to carry the old man to the car.  Grand lay in bed, gasping for breath; his lungs were congested. Rieux pondered. 
The old fellow hadn't any family. What woul d be the point of having him evacuated? He 
and Tarrou could look after him.  Grand's head was buried in the pillow, his cheeks were a greenish gray, his eyes had gone dull, opaque. He seemed to be gazing fixedly at the scanty fire Tarrou was kindling with the remains of an old packing-case. "I'm in a bad way," he muttered. A 
queer crackling sound came from his flame-s eared lungs whenever he tried to speak. 
Rieux told him not to talk and promised to come back. The sick man's lips parted in a 
curious smile, and a look of humorous comp licity flickered across the haggard face. "If I 
pull through, doctor, hats off!" A moment later he sank into extreme prostration. 
 Visiting him again some hours later, th ey found him half sitting up in bed, and 
Rieux was horrified by the rapid change that had come over his face, ravaged by the fires 
of the disease consuming him. However, he seemed more lucid and almost immediately 
asked them to get his manuscript from the dr awer where he always kept it. When Tarrou 
handed him the sheets, he pressed them to his chest without looking at them, then held 
them out to the doctor, indicating by a gesture that he was to read them. There were some fifty pages of manuscript. Glancing through th em, Rieux saw that the bulk of the writing 
consisted of the same sentence written again and again with small variants, 
simplifications or elaborations.  Persistently the month of May, the la dy on horseback, the avenues of the Bois 
recurred, regrouped in different patterns. Th ere were, besides, explanatory notes, some 
exceedingly long, and lists of alternatives. But at  the foot of the last page was written in a 
studiously clear hand: "My d earest Jeanne, Today is Christmas Day and..." Eight words 
only. Above it, in copperplate sc ript, was the latest version of the famous phrase. "Read 
it," Grand whispered. And Rieux read:  "One fine morning in May, a slim young horsewoman might have been seen 
riding a glossy sorrel mare  along the avenues of the Bois, among the flowers...." 
 "Is that it?" There was a feverish quave r in the old voice. Rieux refrained from 
looking at him, and he began to toss about in the bed. "Yes, I know. I know what you're 
thinking. 'Fine' isn't the word. It's?" 
 Rieux clasped his hand under the coverlet.  "No, doctor. It's too late, no time..." His breast heaved painfull y, then suddenly he 
said in a loud, shrill voice: "Burn it!"  The doctor hesitated, but Grand repeated his injunction in so violent a tone and 
with such agony in his voice that Rieux wa lked across to the fi replace and dropped the 
sheets on the dying fire. It blazed up, and th ere was a sudden flood of light, a fleeting 
warmth, in the room. When the doctor came back  to the bed, Grand had his back turned, 
his face almost touching the wall. After inje cting the serum Rieux whispered to his friend 
that Grand wouldn't last the ni ght, and Tarrou volunteered to stay with him. The doctor 
approved.  All night Rieux was haunted by the idea of Grand's death. But next morning he 
found his patient sitting up in bed, talking to Tarrou. His temperature was down to 
normal and there were no symptoms ot her than a generalized prostration. 
 "Yes, doctor," Grand said. "I was overhasty. But I'll make another start. You'll see, I can remember every word."  Rieux looked at Tarrou dubiousl y. "We must wait," he said. 
 But at noon there was no change. By night fall Grand could be considered out of 
danger. Rieux was completely baffled by this "resurrection."  Other surprises were in store for him. About the same time there was brought to the hospital a girl whose case Rieux dia gnosed as hopeless, and he had her sent 
immediately to the isolation ward. She was delirious' and had all the symptoms of 
pneumonic plague. Next morning, however, th e temperature had fallen. As in Grand's 
case the doctor assumed this was the ordinary morning fall that  his experience had taught 
him to regard as a bad sign. But at noon her te mperature still showed no rise and at night 
it went up only a few degrees.  Next morning it was down to normal. Though very exhausted, the girl was breathing freely. Rieux remarked to Tarrou that her recovery was "aga inst all the rules!" 
But in the course of the next week four similar cases came to his notice. 
 The old asthma patient was bubbling ove r with excitement when Rieux and 
Tarrou visited him at the end of the week.  "Would you ever have believed it! They're coming out again," he said.  "Who?"  "Why, the rats!"  Not one dead or living rat had been seen in the town since April.  "Does that mean it's starting a ll over again?" Tarrou asked Rieux. 
 The old man was rubbing his hands.  "You should see 'em running, doc tor! It's a treat, it is!" 
 He himself had seen two rats slipping in to the house by the street door, and some 
neighbors, too, had told him they'd seen rats in their basements. In some houses people 
had heard those, once familiar scratchings and rustlings behind the woodwork. Rieux awaited with much interest the mortalit y figures that were announced every Monday. 
They showed a decrease. 
  PART V  Though this sudden setback of the plague wa s as welcome as it was unlooked-for, our 
townsfolk were in no hurry to jubilate. While intensifying their desire to be set free, the terrible months they had lived through had taught them prudence, and they had come to 
count less and less on a speedy e nd of the epidemic. All the same, this new development 
was the talk of the town, and people began to  nurse hopes none the less heartfelt for being 
unavowed. All else took a back place; that da ily there were new victims counted for little 
beside that staggering fact: the weekly total showed a decrease. One of the signs that a 
return to the golden age of health was secr etly awaited was that our fellow citizens, 
careful though they were not to voice their hope, now began to talk, in, it is true, a 
carefully detached tone, of the new order of  life that would set in after the plague. 
 All agreed that the amenities  of the past couldn't be restored at once; destruction 
is an easier, speedier process than reconstruction. Howeve r, it was thought that a slight 
improvement in the food-supply could safely be counted on, and this would relieve what 
was just now the acutest worry of every household.  But in reality behind these mild aspira tions lurked wild, extravagant hopes, and 
often one of us, becoming aware of this, woul d hastily add that, even on the rosiest view, 
you couldn't expect the plague to stop from one day to another. 
 Actually, while the epidemic did not st op "from one day to a nother," it declined 
more rapidly than we could reasonably have expected. With the first week of January an 
unusually persistent spell of very cold weather settled in a nd seemed to crystallize above 
the town. Yet never before had the sky been  so blue; day after day its icy radiance 
flooded the town with brilliant light, and in th e frost-cleansed air the epidemic seemed to 
lose its virulence, and in each of three cons ecutive weeks a big drop in the death-roll was 
announced. Thus over a relatively brief period th e disease lost practic ally all the gains 
piled up over many months. Its setbacks with seemingly predestined victims, like Grand 
and Rieux's girl patient, its bursts of activity for two or th ree days in some districts 
synchronizing with its total disappearance from others, its new practice of multiplying its victims on, say, a Monday, and on Wednesday let ting almost all escape, in short, its 
accesses of violence followed by spells of  complete inactivity, all these gave an 
impression that its energy was flagging, out  of exhaustion and exasperation, and it was 
losing, with its self-command, the ruthless, almost mathematical  efficiency that had been 
its trump card hitherto. Of a sudden Castel's  anti-plague injections scored frequent 
successes, denied it until now. Indeed, all the treatments the doctors had tentatively 
employed, without definite result s, now seemed almost uniformly  efficacious. It was as if 
the plague had been hounded down and corner ed, and its sudden weakness lent new 
strength to the blunted weapons so far used  against it. Only at rare moments did the 
disease brace itself and make as it were a bli nd and fatal leap at three or four patients 
whose recovery had been expected, a truly ill-starred few, killed off when hope ran 
highest. Such was the case of M. Othon, the magistrate, evacuated from the quarantine 
camp; Tarrou said of him that "he'd had no luck," but one couldn't tell if he had in mind the life or the death of M. Othon. But, genera lly speaking, the epidemic was in retreat all 
along the line; the official communiques, which had at first encour aged no more than 
shadowy, half-hearted hopes, now confirmed the popular belief that the victory was won 
and the enemy abandoning his positions. Really , however, it is doubtful if this could be 
called a victory. All that could be said was that the disease seemed to be leaving as 
unaccountably as it had come. Our strategy had not changed, but whereas yesterday it had 
obviously failed, today it seemed triumphant. Indeed, one's chief impression was that the epidemic had called a retreat af ter reaching all its objectives; it had, so to speak, achieved 
its purpose.  Nevertheless, it seemed as if nothing had changed in th e town. Silent as ever by 
day, the streets filled up at nightfall with the usual crow ds of people, now wearing 
overcoats and scarves. Cafes and picture-houses  did as much business as before. But on a 
closer view you might notice that people looked less strain ed, and they occasionally 
smiled. And this brought home the fact that  since the outbreak of plague no one had 
hitherto been seen to smile in public. The truth was that for many months the town had 
been stifling under an airless shroud, in wh ich a rent had now been made, and every 
Monday when he turned on the radio, each of us learned that the ri ft was widening; soon 
he would be able to breathe freely. It was at  best a negative solace, with no immediate 
impact on men's lives. Still, had anyone been told a month earlier that a train had just left or a boat put in, or that cars were to be allowed on the stre ets again, the news would have 
been received with looks of incredulity; wh ereas in mid-January an announcement of this 
kind would have caused no surprise. The ch ange, no doubt, was slight. Yet, however 
slight, it proved what a vast forward stride our townsfolk ha d made in the way of hope. 
And indeed it could be said that once the fa intest stirring of hope became possible, the 
dominion of the plague was ended.  It must, however, be admitted that our fellow citizens' reactions during that month 
were diverse to the point of incoherence. More precisely, they fluctuated between high 
optimism and extreme depression. Hence the odd circumstance that several more 
attempts to escape took place at the very moment when the statistics were most encouraging. This took the authorities by surp rise, and, apparently, the sentries too, since 
most of the "escapists" brought it off. But, looking into it, one saw that people who tried 
to escape at this time were prompted by quite understandable motives. Some of them 
plague had imbued with a scepticism so t horough that it was now a second nature; they 
had become allergic to hope in any form. T hus even when the plague had run its course, 
they went on living by its standards. They were , in short, behind the times. In the case of 
others, chiefly those who had been living until  now in forced separation from those they 
loved, the rising wind of hope, after all these months of durance and depression, had 
fanned impatience to a blaze and swept away thei r self-control. They were seized with a 
sort of panic at the thought th at they might die so near th e goal and never see again the 
ones they loved, and their long privation ha ve no recompense. Thus, though for weary 
months and months they had endured thei r long ordeal with dogge d perseverance, the 
first thrill of hope had been enough to shatter what fear and hope lessness had failed to 
impair. And in the frenzy of their haste they  tried to outstrip the plague, incapable of 
keeping pace with it up to the end.  Meanwhile, there were various symptoms of the growing optimism. Prices, for instance, fell sharply. This fall was unacc ountable from the purely economic viewpoint. Our difficulties were as great as ever, the gates were kept rigorously closed, and the food 
situation was far from showing any impr ovement. Thus it was a purely psychological 
reaction, as if the dwindling of the plague must have repercussi ons in all fields. Others to 
profit by the spread of optimism were those who used to live in groups and had been 
forced to live apart. The two convents reopened and their communal life was resumed. 
The troops, too, were regrouped in such barr acks as had not been requisitioned, and 
settled down to the garr ison life of the past. 
 Minor details, but significant. 
 This state of subdued yet active ferment prevailed until January 25, when the weekly total showed so striking a decline that, after consulting the medical board, the 
authorities announced that the epidemic could be regarded as definitely stemmed. True, 
the communique went on to say that, ac ting with a prudence of which the population 
would certainly approve, the Prefect had deci ded that the gates of the town were to 
remain closed for two weeks more, and the pr ophylactic measures to remain in force for 
another month. During this period, at the leas t sign of danger the standing orders would 
be strictly enforced and, if necessary, prol onged thereafter for such a period as might be 
deemed desirable."  All, however, concurred in regarding these phrases as me re official verbiage, and 
the night of January 25 was the occasion of much festivity. To associate himself with the 
popular rejoicings, the Prefect gave orders for the street lighting to be resumed as in the 
past. And the townspeople paraded the brilliantly lighted streets in boisterous groups, 
laughing and singing.  True, in some houses the shutters remained closed, and those within listened in silence to the joyful shouts outside. Yet even in these hous es of mourning a feeling of 
deep relief prevailed; whether because at last  the fear of seeing other members of the 
household taken from them was calmed or because the shadow of personal anxiety was 
lifted from their hearts. The families that perforce withdrew themselves the most from the 
general jubilation were those who at this hour had one of their members down with 
plague in hospital and, whether in a quaranti ne camp or at home, waited in enforced 
seclusion for the epidemic to have done with them as it had done with the others. No 
doubt these families had hopes, but they hoarded  them and forbade themselves to draw 
on them before feeling quite sure they were justified. And this time of waiting in silence 
and exile, in a limbo between joy and grief,  seemed still crueler for the gladness all 
around them.  But these exceptions did not diminish th e satisfaction of the great majority. No 
doubt the plague was not yet ended, a fact of wh ich they were to be reminded; still, in 
imagination they could already hear, weeks in  advance, trains whistling on their way to 
an outside world that had no limit, and steamer s hooting as they put out from the harbor 
across shining seas. Next day these fancies would have passed and qualms of doubt returned. But for the moment the whole town was on the move, quitting the dark, lugubrious confines where it had struck its roots of stone, and setting forth at last, like a 
shipload of survivors, to ward a land of promise. 
 That night Tarrou, Rieux, Rambert, and their colleagues joined for a while the 
marching crowds and they, too, felt as if they trod on air. Long after they had turned off 
the main streets, even when in empty byw ays they walked past shuttered houses, the 
joyful clamor followed them up, and because of their fatigue somehow they could not disassociate the sorrow behind those closed shutters from the joy filling the central 
streets. Thus the coming liberation had a twofold aspect, of happiness and tears. 
 At one moment, when the cries of exu ltation in the distance were swelling to a 
roar, Tarrou stopped abruptly. A small, sleek form was scampering along the roadway: a 
cat, the first cat any of them had seen sin ce the spring. It stopped in the middle of the 
road, hesitated, licked a paw and quickly pa ssed it behind its right ear; then it started 
forward again and vanished into the darkness. 
 Tarrou smiled to himself; the little ol d man on the balcony, too, would be pleased. 
  BUT in those days when the plague seemed to be retreating, slinking back to the obscure lair from which it had stealthily emerged, at  least one person in the town viewed this 
retreat with consternation, if Tarrou's notes are to be trusted; and that man was Cottard. 
 To tell the truth, these diary notes take  a rather curious turn from the date on 
which the death returns began to drop. The handwriting becomes much harder to read, this may have been due to fatigue, and th e diarist jumps from one topic to another 
without transition. What is more, these later no tes lack the objectivit y of the earlier ones; 
personal considerations creep in. Thus, sa ndwiched between long passages dealing with 
the case of Cottard, we find a brief account of  the old man and the cats. Tarrou conveys 
to us that the plague had in no wise lesse ned his appreciation of  the old fellow, who 
continued equally to interest him after the ep idemic had run its course; unfortunately, he 
could not go on interesting him, and this through no lack of good in tentions on Tarrou's 
part.  He had done his best to see him again. Some days after that memorable 25th of 
January he stationed himself at the corner of the little street. The cat s were back at their 
usual places, basking in the patches of sunlight . But at the ritual hour the shutters stayed 
closed. And never once did Tarrou see them  open on the following days. He drew the 
rather odd conclusion that the old fellow was either dead or vexed, if vexed, the reason 
being that he had thought that he was right and the plague had put him in the wrong; if 
dead, the question was (as in the case of the old asthmatic) had he been a saint? Tarrou 
hardly thought so, but he found in the old man's case "a pointer." 
 "Perhaps," he wrote, "we can only reach approximations of sainthood. In which case we must make shift with a mild, benevolent diabolism."  Interspersed with observations relating to  Cottard are remarks, scattered here and 
there, about Grand, he was now convalescent and had gone back to work as if nothing 
had happened, and about Rieux's mother. The oc casional conversations he had with her, 
when living under the same roof, the old lady's attitudes, her opinions on the plague, are 
all recorded in detail in th e diary. Tarrou lays stress a bove all on Mme Rieux's self-
effacement, her way of explaining things in the simplest possible words, her predilection 
for a special window at which she always sat in the early evening, holding herself rather 
straight, her hands at rest, her eyes fixed on th e quiet street below, until twilight filled the 
room and she showed among the gathering sh adows as a motionless black form which 
gradually merged into the invading darkness.  He remarks on the "lightness" with which 
she moved from one room to the other; on her kindness, though no precise instances had 
come to his notice he discerned its gentle glow  in all she said and di d; on the gift she had 
of knowing everything without (a pparently) taking thought; and la stly that, dim and silent though she was, she quailed before no light, even  the garish light of the plague. At this 
point Tarrou's handwriting began to fall off oddly; indeed, the following lines were 
almost illegible. And, as if in confirmation of this loss of grip upon himself, the last lines of the entry deal, for the first time in the diar y, with his personal life. "She reminds me of 
my mother; what I loved most in Mother wa s her self-effacement, her 'dimness,' as they 
say, and it's she I've always wanted to get b ack to. It happened eight years ago; but I can't 
say she died. She only effaced herself a trifle more than usual, and when I looked round she was no longer there."  But to return to Cottard. When the week ly totals began to show a decline, he 
visited Rieux several times on various pretexts. But obviously what he really wanted was to get from Rieux his opinion on th e probable course of the epidemic. 
 "Do you really think it can stop like that , all of a sudden?" He was skeptical about 
this, or anyhow professed to be. But the fact that he kept  on asking the question seemed 
to imply he was less sure than he professed to be. From the middle of January Rieux gave 
him fairly optimistic answers. But these were  not to Cottard's liking, and his reactions 
varied on each occasion, from mere petula nce to great despondency. One day the doctor 
was moved to tell him that, t hough the statistics were  highly promising, it was too soon to 
say definitely that we were out of the wood.  "In other words," Cottard said promptly, "there's no knowing. It may start again at 
any moment."  "Quite so. Just as it's equally possible the improvement may speed up."  Distressing to everyone else, this state of uncertainty seemed to agree with Cottard. Tarrou observed that he would enter in to conversations with shopkeepers in his 
part of the town, with the obvious desire of propagating the opinion expressed by Rieux. Indeed, he had no trouble in doing this. After the first exhilaration following the 
announcement of the plague's decline had wo rn off, doubts had returned to many minds. 
And the sight of their anxiety reassured Cottard. Just as at other times he yielded to 
discouragement. "Yes," he said gloomily to Ta rrou, "one of these days the gates will be 
opened. And then, you'll see, they 'll drop me like a live coal!" 
 Everyone was struck by his abrupt cha nges of mood during the first three weeks 
of January. Though normally he spared no pains to make himself liked by neighbors and acquaintances, now, for whole days, he delib erately cold-shouldered them. On these 
occasions, so Tarrou gathered, he abruptly cu t off outside contacts and retired morosely 
into his shell. He was no more to be seen in restaurants or at the th eater or in his favorite 
cafes. However, he seemed una ble to resume the obscure, hu mdrum life he had led before 
the epidemic. He stayed in his room and had his meals sent up from a near-by restaurant. 
Only at nightfall did he venture forth to ma ke some small purchases, and on leaving the 
shop he would furtively roam the darker, less -frequented streets. Once or twice Tarrou 
ran into him on these occasions, but failed to elicit more than a few gruff monosyllables. 
Then, from one day to another, he became sociable again, talked volubly about the plague, asking everyone for his views on it, and mingled in the crowd with evident 
pleasure.  On January 25, the day of the official announcement, Cottard went to cover again. 
Two days later Tarrou came across him loitering in a side-street. When Cottard suggested he should accompany him home, Tarrou demurred;  he'd had a particularly tiring day. But 
Cottard wouldn't hear of a refusal. He seem ed much agitated, gesticulated freely, spoke very rapidly and in a very loud tone. He began by asking Ta rrou if he really thought the 
official communique meant an end of the pl ague. Tarrou replied that obviously a mere 
official announcement couldn't stop an epid emic, but it certainly looked as if, barring 
accidents, it would shortly cease. 
 "Yes," Cottard said. "Bar ring accidents. And accidents will happen, won't they?" 
 Tarrou pointed out that the authorities ha d allowed for that possibility by refusing 
to open the gates for another fortnight.  "And very wise they were!" Cottard excl aimed in the same excited tone. "By the 
way things are going, I should say th ey'll have to eat their words." 
 Tarrou agreed this might be so; still, he thought it wiser to  count on the opening 
of the gates and a return to normal life in the near future.  "Granted!" Cottard rejoined. "But what do you mean by 'a return to normal life'?" 
 Tarrou smiled. "New films at the picture-houses." 
 But Cottard didn't smile. Was it supposed, he asked, that the plague wouldn't have 
changed anything and the life of the town would go on as before, exactly as if nothing had happened? Tarrou thought th at the plague would have  changed things and not 
changed them; naturally our fellow citizens' strongest desire was, and would be, to 
behave as if nothing had changed and for that reason nothing would be changed, in a 
sense. But, to look at it from another angl e, one can't forget everything, however great 
one's wish to do so; the plague was bound to  leave traces, anyhow, in people's hearts. 
 To this Cottard rejoined curtly that he wasn't interested in hearts; indeed, they 
were the last thing he both ered about. What interested  him was knowing whether the 
whole administration wouldn't be changed, lock , stock, and barrel; whether, for instance, 
the public services would function as befo re. Tarrou had to admit he had no inside 
knowledge on the matter; his personal theory  was that after the upheaval caused by the 
epidemic, there would be some delay in ge tting these services under way again. Also, it 
seemed likely that all sorts of new problems would arise and necessitate at least some 
reorganization of the administrative system. 
 Cottard nodded. "Yes, that's quite on the cards; in fact everyone will have to make a fresh start."  They were nearing Cottard's house. He now seemed more cheerful, determined to take a rosier view of the future. Obviously  he was picturing the town entering on a new 
lease of life, blotting out its past and starting again w ith a clean sheet. 
 "So that's that," Tarrou smiled. "Quite likely things will pan out all right for you, 
too, who can say? It'll be a new life for all of us, in a manner of speaking."  They were shaking hands at the door of  the apartment house where Cottard lived. 
 "Quite right!" Cottard was growing more and more excited. "That would be a great idea, starting again with a clean sheet."  Suddenly from the lightless hall two men emerged. Tarrou had hardly time to hear 
his companion mutter: "Now, what do those bi rds want?" when the men in question, who 
looked like subordinate government employees in their best clothe s, cut in with an 
inquiry if his name was Cottard. With a stifled exclamation Cottard swung round and 
dashed off into the darkness. Taken by surpri se, Tarrou and the two men gazed blankly at 
each other for some moments.  Then Tarrou asked them what they wanted. In noncommittal tones they informed 
him that they wanted "some information," and walked away, unhurry ing, in the direction 
Cottard had taken.  On his return home Tarrou wrote out an account of this peculiar incident, 
following it up with a "Feeling very tired toni ght", which is confirmed by his handwriting 
in this entry. He added that he had still  much to do, but that was no reason for not 
"holding himself in readiness," and he quest ioned if he were ready. As a sort of 
postscript, and, in fact, it is he re that Tarrou's diary ends, he noted that there is always a 
certain hour of the day and of the night when a man's courage is at its lowest ebb, and it 
was that hour only that he feared.  When next day, a few days before the date fixed for the opening of the gates, Dr. Rieux came home at noon, he was wondering if  the telegram he was expecting had 
arrived. Though his days were no less strenuous than at the height of the epidemic, the 
prospect of imminent release had obliterated his fatigue. Hope had returned and with it a 
new zest for life. No man can live on the stretch all the time, with his energy and willpower strained to the breaking-point, and it is a joy to be able to relax at last and 
loosen nerves and muscles that were braced fo r the struggle. If the telegram, too, that he 
awaited brought good news, Rieux would be able to make a fresh start. Indeed, he had a 
feeling that everyone in those days was making a fresh start. 
 He walked past the concierge's room in the hall. The new man, old Michel's successor, his face pressed to the window  looking on the hall, gave him a smile. 
 As he went up the stairs, the man's face, pale with exhausti on and privation, but 
smiling, hovered before his eyes.  Yes, he'd make a fresh start, once the period of "abstractions" was over, and with 
any luck? He was opening the door with these thoughts in his mind when he saw his mother coming down the hall to meet him. M. Tarrou, she told him, wasn't well. He had 
risen at the usual time, but did not feel up to going out and had returned to bed. Mme 
Rieux felt worried about him. 
 "Quite likely it's nothing serious," her son said.  Tarrou was lying on his back, his heavy head deeply indenting the pillow, the 
coverlet bulging above his massive chest. Hi s head was aching and his temperature up. 
The symptoms weren't very definite, he to ld Rieux, but they might well be those of 
plague.  After examining him Rieux said: "No, there's nothing definite as yet."  But Tarrou also suffered from a raging th irst, and in the hallway the doctor told 
his mother that it might be plague.  "Oh!" she exclaimed. "Surely that's not possible, not now!" And after a moment 
added: "Let's keep him here, Bernard."  Rieux pondered. "Strictly speaking, I've no right to do that," he said doubtfully. 
"Still, the gates will be opened quite soon. If you weren't here, I think I'd take it on myself."  "Bernard, let him stay, and let me st ay too. You know, I've just had another 
inoculation."  The doctor pointed out that Tarrou, too, had had inoculations, though it was 
possible, tired as he was, he'd overlooked th e last one or omitted to take the necessary 
precautions.  Rieux was going to the surgery as he spoke , and when he returned to the bedroom 
Tarrou noticed that he had a box of the big ampoules containing the serum. 
 "Ah, so it is that," he said.  "Not necessarily; but we mustn't run any risks."  Without replying Tarrou extended his arm and submitted to the prolonged injections he himself had so often administered to others.  "We'll judge better this evening."  Rieux looked Tarrou in the eyes. 
 "But what about is olating me, Rieux?" 
 "It's by no means certain that you have plague."  Tarrou smiled with an effort.  "Well, it's the first time I've known you do the injection without ordering the 
patient off to the isolation ward."  Rieux looked away.  "You'll be better here. My moth er and I will look after you." 
 Tarrou said nothing and the doctor, w ho was putting away the ampoules in the 
box, waited for him to speak before looking round. But still Tarrou said nothing, and 
finally Rieux went up to the bed. The sick  man was gazing at him steadily, and though 
his face was drawn, the gray eyes were calm. Rieux smiled down on him.  "Now try to sleep. I'll be back soon."  As he was going out he heard Tarrou calling, and turned back. Tarrou's manner 
had an odd effect, as though he were at once trying to keep b ack what he had to say and 
forcing himself to say it.  "Rieux," he said at last, "you must te ll me the whole truth. I count on that." 
 "I promise it."  Tarrou's heavy face relaxed in a brief smile.  "Thanks. I don't want to die, and I sha ll put up a fight. But if I lose the match, I 
want to make a good end of it."  Bending forward, Rieux pressed his shoulder.  "No. To become a saint, you n eed to live. So fight away!" 
 In the course of that day the weather,  which after being very cold had grown 
slightly milder, broke in a se ries of violent hails torms followed by rain. At sunset the sky 
cleared a little, and it was bitterly cold  again. Rieux came home in the evening. His 
overcoat still on, he entered his friend's bedr oom. Tarrou did not seem to have moved, 
but his set lips, drained white by fever, to ld of the effort he he was keeping up. 
 "Well?" Rieux asked.  Tarrou raised his broad shoulders  a little out of the bedclothes. 
 "Well," he said, "I'm losing the match."  The doctor bent over him. Ganglia had fo rmed under the burning skin and there 
was a rumbling in his chest, like the sound of  a hidden forge. The strange thing was that 
Tarrou showed symptoms of both varieties of plague at once.  Rieux straightened up and said the serum hadn't yet had time to take effect. An 
uprush of fever in his throat drowned th e few words that Tarrou tried to utter. 
 After dinner Rieux and his mother took up their posts at the sick man's bedside. 
 The night began with a struggle, and Ri eux knew that this grim wrestling with the 
angel of plague was to last until dawn. In this struggle Tarrou's robust shoulders and 
chest were not his greatest assets; rather, th e blood that had spurte d under Rieux's needle and, in this blood, that something more vita l than the soul, which no human skill can 
bring to light. The doctor's task could be only to  watch his friend's struggle. As to what he 
was about to do, the stimulants  to inject, the abscesses to stimulate? many months' 
repeated failures had taught him to appreciate such expedients at thei r true value. Indeed, 
the only way in which he might help was to provide opportunities fo r the beneficence of 
chance, which too often stays dormant unless rous ed to action. Luck was an ally he could 
not dispense with. For Rieux was confronted by an aspect of the pla gue that baffled him. 
Yet again it was doing all it could to confound the tactics used against it; it launched 
attacks in unexpected places and retreated fr om those where it seemed definitely lodged. 
Once more it was out to darken counsel. 
 Tarrou struggled without moving. Not once in the course of the night did he 
counter the enemy's attacks by restless agitation; only with all his stolid bulk, with 
silence, did he carry on the fight. Nor did he even try to speak, thus intimating, after his 
fashion, that he could no longer let his atte ntion stray. Rieux could follow the vicissitudes 
of the struggle only in his friend's eyes, now open and now shut; in the eyelids, now more 
closely welded to the eyeball, now distended;  and in his gaze fixed on some object in the 
room or brought back to the doctor and his mother. And each time it met the doctor's gaze, with a great effort Tarrou smiled.  At one moment there came a sound of hurry ing footsteps in the street. They were 
in flight before a distant throbbing which gradually approached until  the street was loud 
with the clamor of the downpour; another ra in-squall was sweepi ng the town, mingled 
presently with hailstones that clattered on the sidewalk. Window aw nings were flapping 
wildly. Rieux, whose attention had been divert ed momentarily by the noises of the squall, 
looked again across the shadows at Tarrou's face, on which fell the light of a small bedside lamp. His mother was knitting, raising her eyes now and then from her work to 
gaze at the sick man. 
 The doctor had done everything that coul d be done. When the squall had passed, 
the silence in the room grew denser, filled only by the silent turmoil of the unseen battle. 
His nerves overwrought by sleeplessness, the doct or fancied he could hear, on the edge of 
the silence, that faint eerie sibilance which had haunted his ears ever since the beginning 
of the epidemic. He made a sign to his mother, indicating she should go to bed. She 
shook her head, and her eyes grew brighter; th en she examined carefully, at her needle-
tips, a stitch of which she was unsure. Rieux got up, gave the sick man a drink, and sat down again.  Footsteps rang on the pavement, neari ng, then receding; people were taking 
advantage of the lull to hurry home. For the fi rst time the doctor realized that this night, 
without the clang of ambulances and full of belated wayfarers, was just like a night of the 
past, a plague-free night. It  was as if the pestilence, hounded away by cold, the street-
lamps, and the crowd, had fled from the depths of the town and taken shelter in this warm 
room and was launching its last offensive at Tarrou's inert body. No  longer did it thresh 
the air above the houses with its flail. But it wa s whistling softly in th e stagnant air of the 
sickroom, and this it was that Rieux had been hearing since the long vigil began. And 
now it was for him to wait and watch until that  strange sound ceased here too, and here as 
well the plague confessed defeat.  A little before dawn Rieux leaned toward his mother and whispered:  "You'd better have some rest now, as you' ll have to relieve rne at eight. Mind you 
take your drops before going to bed." 
 Mme Rieux rose, folded her knitting, and went to the bedside. Tarrou had had his 
eyes shut for some time. Sweat had pl astered his hair on his stubborn forehead. 
 Mme Rieux sighed, and he opened his eyes. He saw the gentle face bent over him 
and, athwart the surge of fever, that steadfast  smile took form again. But at once the eyes 
closed. Left to himself, Rieux moved into th e chair his mother had just left. The street 
was silent and no sound came from the sleeping town. The chill of daybreak was beginning to make itself felt.  The doctor dozed off, but very soon an early cart rattling down the street awaked him. Shivering a little, he looked at Tarrou and saw that a lull had come; he, too, was 
sleeping. The iron-shod wheels rumbled away into the distance. Darkness still was 
pressing on the windowpanes. When the doctor came beside the bed, Tarrou gazed at him 
with expressionless eyes, like a ma n still on the frontier of sleep. 
 "You slept, didn't you?" Rieux asked.  "Yes."  "Breathing better?"  "A bit. Does that mean anything?"  Rieux kept silent for some moments; then he said:  "No, Tarrou, it doesn't mean anything. Y ou know as well as I that there's often a 
remission in the morning."  "Thanks." Tarrou nodded his approval. "Always tell me the exact truth." 
 Rieux was sitting on the side of the bed. Beside him he could feel the sick man's legs, stiff and hard as the limbs of an e ffigy on a tomb. Tarrou was breathing with more 
difficulty.  "The fever'll come back, won't it, Rieux?" he gasped. 
 "Yes. But at noon we shall know where we stand." 
 Tarrou shut his eyes; he seemed to be mustering up his strength. There was a look 
of utter weariness on his face. He was waiting for the fe ver to rise and already it was 
stirring somewhat in the depths of his being. When he opened his eyes, his gaze was misted. It brightened only when he saw Ri eux bending over him, a tumbler in his hand. 
 'Drink '  Tarrou drank, then slowly lowe red his head on to the pillow. 
 "It's a long business," he murmured.  Rieux clasped his arm, but Tarrou, whos e head was averted, showed no reaction. 
 Then suddenly, as if some inner dike had given way without warning, the fever 
surged back, dyeing his cheeks and forehead. Tarrou's eyes came back to the doctor, who, bending again, gave him a look of affectionate encouragement.  Tarrou tried to shape a smile, but it coul d not force its way through the set jaws 
and lips welded by dry saliva. In the rigid f ace only the eyes lived still, glowing with 
courage.  At seven Mme Rieux returned to the be droom. The doctor went to the surgery to 
ring up the hospital and arrange for a substi tute. He also decided to postpone his 
consultations; then lay down for some mome nts on the surgery couch. Five minutes later 
he went back to the bedroom. Tarrou's face was turned toward Mme Rieux, who was sitting close beside the bed, her hands folded on her lap; in the dim light of the room she seemed no more than a darker patch of shadow . Tarrou was gazing at her so intently that, 
putting a finger to her lips, Mme Rieux rose and switched off the bedside lamp. Behind 
the curtains the light was growing, and presen tly, when the sick man's face grew visible, 
Mme Rieux could see his eyes still intent  on her. Bending above the bed, she smoothed 
out the bolster and, as she straightened up, laid her hand for a moment on his moist, 
tangled hair. Then she heard a muffled voice, which seemed to come from very far away, 
murmur: "Thank you," and that all was well now . By the time she was back in her chair 
Tarrou had shut his eyes, and, despite the se aled mouth, a faint smile seemed to hover on 
the wasted face.  At noon the fever reached its climax. A visceral cough racked the sick man's body and he now was spitting blood. The ganglia had c eased swelling, but they  were still there, 
like lumps of iron embedded in the joints . Rieux decided that  lancing them was 
impracticable. Now and then, in the interv als between bouts of fever and coughing fits, 
Tarrou still gazed at his friends. But soon hi s eyes opened less and less often and the 
glow that shone out from the ravaged face in the brief moments of recognition grew steadily fainter. The storm, lashing his body in to convulsive movement, lit it up with ever 
rarer flashes, and in the heart of the temp est he was slowly drif ting, derelict. And now 
Rieux had before him only a masklike face, inert, from which the smile had gone forever. This human form, his friend's, lacerated by th e spear-thrusts of the plague, consumed by 
searing, superhuman fires, buffeted by all the raging winds of heaven, was foundering 
under his eyes in the dark flood of the pestile nce, and he could do nothing to avert the 
wreck. He could only stand, unavailing, on the s hore, empty-handed and sick at heart, 
unarmed and helpless yet again under the ons et of calamity. And thus, when the end 
came, the tears that blinded Rieux's eyes were tears of impotence; and he did not see Tarrou roll over, face to the wall, and die w ith a short, hollow groan as if somewhere 
within him an essential chord had snapped. 
 The next night was not one of struggle but of silence. In the tranquil death-
chamber, beside the dead body now in ev eryday clothing, here , too, Rieux felt it 
brooding, that elemental peace which, when he was sitting many nights before on the 
terrace high above the plague, had followed the brief foray at the gates. Then, already, it had brought to his mind the silence brooding over the beds in which he had let men die. 
There as here it was the same solemn pause, th e lull that follows battle; it was the silence 
of defeat. But the silence now enveloping his de ad friend, so dense, so much akin to the 
nocturnal silence of the streets and of the to wn set free at last, ma de Rieux cruelly aware 
that this defeat was final, the last disastrous  battle that ends a wa r and makes peace itself 
an ill beyond all remedy. The doctor could not tell if Tarrou had found peace, now that all 
was over, but for himself he had a feeling that no peace was possible to him henceforth, 
any more than there can be an armistice for a mother bereaved of her son or for a man 
who buries his friend.  The night was cold again, with frosty stars sparkling in a clear, wintry sky. 
 And in the dimly lit room they felt the cold pressing itself to the windowpanes 
and heard the long, silvery suspir ation of a polar night. Mme Ri eux sat near the bed in her 
usual attitude, her right side lit up by the beds ide lamp. In the center of the room, outside 
the little zone of light, Rieux sat, waiting. Now and then thoughts of his wife waylaid 
him, but he brushed them aside each time.  When the night began, the heels of passers-by had rung briskly in the frozen air.  "Have you attended to everyt hing?" Mme Rieux had asked. 
 "Yes, I've telephoned." 
 Then they had resumed their silent vigil. From time to time Mme Rieux stole a glance at her son, and whenever he caught her doing this, he smiled. Out in the street the 
usual night-time sounds bridged the long silences. A good many cars were on the road 
again, though officially this was not yet permitte d; they sped past with a long hiss of tires 
on the pavement, receded, and returned. Voices , distant calls silen ce again, a clatter of 
horse hoofs, the squeal of streetcars rounding a curve, vague murmurs, then once more 
the quiet breathing of the night.  "Bernard?"  "Yes?"  "Not too tired?"  "No."  At that moment he knew what his moth er was thinking, and that she loved him. 
But he knew, too, that to love someone means relatively little; or, ra ther, that love is 
never strong enough to find the words befitting it. Thus he and his mother would always 
love each other silently. And one day she, or he, would die, without ever, all their lives 
long, having gone farther than this by way of making their affection known. Thus, too, he 
had lived at Tarrou's side, and Tarrou had di ed this evening wit hout their friendship's 
having had time to enter fully in to the life of either. Tarrou ha d "lost the match," as he put 
it. But what had he, Rieux, won? No more than the experience of having known plague 
and remembering it, of having known friendship and remembering it, of knowing affection and being destined one day to re member it. So all a man could win in the 
conflict between plague and life was knowle dge and memories. But Tarrou, perhaps, 
would have called that winning the match.  Another car passed, and Mme Rieux stirre d slightly. Rieux smiled toward her. 
She assured him she wasn't tired and immediately added:  "You must go and have a good long rest  in the mountains, over there." 
 "Yes, Mother."  Certainly he'd take a rest "over there. " It, too, would be a pretext for memory. 
 But if that was what it meant, winning the match, how hard it must be to live only with what one knows and what one remembers,  cut off from what one hopes for! It was 
thus, most probably, that Tarrou had lived, and he realized the bleak  sterility of a life 
without illusions. There can be no peace wit hout hope, and Tarrou, denying as he did the 
right to condemn anyone whomsoever, t hough he knew well that no one can help 
condemning and it befalls even the victim sometimes to turn executioner, Tarrou had lived a life riddled with c ontradictions and had never known hope's solace. Did that 
explain his aspiration toward saintliness, hi s quest of peace by service in the cause of 
others? Actually Rieux had no idea of the answ er to that question, and it mattered little. 
The only picture of Tarrou he would always have would be the picture of a man who 
firmly gripped the steering-wheel of his car when driving, or else the picture of that 
stalwart body, now lying motionl ess. Knowing meant that: a living warmth, and a picture 
of death.  That, no doubt, explains Dr. Rieux's composure on r eceiving next morning the 
news of his wife's death. He was in the su rgery. His mother came in, almost running, and 
handed him a telegram; then went back to the hall to give the telegraph-boy a tip. When she returned, her son was holdi ng the telegram open in his hand. She looked at him, but 
his eyes were resolutely fixed on the window ; it was flooded with the effulgence of the 
morning sun rising above the harbor. 
 "Bernard," she said gently.  The doctor turned and looked at her almost as if she were a stranger. 
 "The telegram?"  "Yes," he said, "that's it. A week ago."  Mme Rieux turned her face toward the window. Rieux kept silent for a while. 
Then he told his mother not to cry, he'd been expecting it, but it was hard all the same. And he knew, in saying this, that this su ffering was nothing new. For many months, and 
for the last two days, it was the selfsame suffering going on and on.   AT last, at daybreak on a fine February mo rning, the ceremonial opening of the gates 
took place, acclaimed by the populace, th e newspapers, the radio, and official 
communiques. It only remains for the narrat or to give what account he can of the 
rejoicings that followed, though he himself was one of those debarred from sharing in 
them wholeheartedly.  Elaborate day and night fetes were orga nized, and at the same time smoke began 
to rise from locomotives in the station, and ships were already heading for our harbour, 
reminders in their divers ways that this was the long-awaited day of reuniting, and the 
end of tears for all who had been parted.  We can easily picture, at this stage, the consequences of that feeling of separation 
which had so long rankled in the hearts of so many of our townsfolk.  Trains coming in were as crowded as those that left the town in the course of the day. Every passenger had reserved his seat l ong in advance and had been on tenterhooks 
during the past fortnight  lest at the last moment the authorities should go back on their 
decision. Some of these incoming travelers we re still somewhat nervous; though as a rule 
they knew the lot of those nearest and dearest to them, they were st ill in the dark about 
others and the town itself, of which thei r imagination painted a grim and terrifying 
picture. But this applies only to people who had not been eating their hearts out during 
the long months of exile, a nd not to parted lovers. 
 The lovers, indeed, were wholly wrapped up in their fixed idea, and for them one 
thing only had changed.  Whereas during those months of separa tion time had never gone quickly enough 
for their liking and they were always wanting to speed its f light, now that they were in 
sight of the town they would have liked  to slow it down and hold each moment in 
suspense, once the brakes went on and th e train was entering the station. For the 
sensation, confused perhaps, but none the le ss poignant for that, of all those days and 
weeks and months of life lost to their love ma de them vaguely feel they were entitled to 
some compensation; this present hour of joy should run at half the speed of those long 
hours of waiting. And the people who awaited th em at home or on the platform, among 
the latter Rambert, whose wife, warned in good time, had got busy at once and was 
coming by the first train, were likewise fr etting with impatience and quivering with 
anxiety. For even Rambert felt a nervous trem or at the thought that soon he would have to confront a love and a devo tion that the plague months ha d slowly refined to a pale 
abstraction, with the fles h-and-blood woman who ha d given rise to them. 
 If only he could put the clock back and be once more the man who, at the 
outbreak of the epidemic, had had only one thoug ht and one desire: to escape and return 
to the woman he loved! But that, he knew, was out of the question now; he had changed 
too greatly. The plague had fo rced on him a detachment which, try as he might, he 
couldn't think away, and which like a formless fear haunted his mind. Almost he thought 
the plague had ended too abruptly, he hadn' t had time to pull himself together. Happiness 
was bearing down on him full speed, the event outrunning expectation. Rambert 
understood that all would be restored to him in a flash, and joy break on him like a flame 
with which there is no dallying. 
 Everyone indeed, more or less consciously, felt as he did, and it is of all those 
people on the platform that we wish to speak. Each was returning to his personal life, yet 
the sense of comradeship persisted and they  were exchanging smiles and cheerful glances 
among themselves. But the moment they saw the smoke of the approaching engine, the feeling of exile vanished before an uprush  of overpowering, bewildering joy. And when 
the train stopped, all those interminable-s eeming separations which often had begun on 
this same platform came to an end in one ecstatic moment, when arms closed with hungry 
possessiveness on bodies whose living shape they had forgotten. As for Rambert, he hadn't time to see that form running toward him; already she had flung herself upon his breast. And with his arms locked around her,  pressing to his shoulder the head of which 
he saw only the familiar hair, he let his tear s flow freely, unknowing if they rose from 
present joy or from sorrow too long represse d; aware only that they would prevent his 
making sure if the face buried in the hollow of  his shoulder were the face of which he had 
dreamed so often or, instead, a stranger's face. For the moment he wished to behave like all those others around him who believed, or made believe, that plague can come and go 
without changing anything in men's hearts. 
 Nestling to one another, they went to their homes, blind to the outside world and 
seemingly triumphant over the plague, forgetting every sadness and the plight of those who had come by the same train and found no one awaiting them, and were bracing 
themselves to hear in their homes a confir mation of the fear that the long silence had 
already implanted in their hearts. For thes e last, who had now for company only their 
new-born grief, for those who at this moment were dedicating themselves to a lifelong 
memory of bereavement, for these unhappy pe ople matters were very different, the pangs 
of separation had touched their climax. For the mothers, husbands, wives, and lovers who 
had lost all joy, now that the loved one lay under a layer of quicklime in a death-pit or 
was a mere handful of indis tinctive ashes in a gray mound, the plague had not yet ended. 
 But who gave a thought to these lonely m ourners? Routing the cold flaws that had 
been threshing the air since early-morni ng, the sun was pouring on the town a steady 
flood of tranquil light. In the forts on the hi lls, under the sky of pure, unwavering blue, 
guns were thundering without a break. And everyone was out and about to celebrate 
those crowded moments when the time of ordeal ended and the time of forgetting had not yet begun.  In streets and squares people were da ncing. Within twenty-four hours the motor 
traffic had doubled and the ever more num erous cars were held up at every turn by merry-making crowds. Every church bell wa s in full peal throughout the afternoon, and 
the bells filled the blue and gold sky with their reverberations. 
 Indeed, in all the churches thanksgiving se rvices were being held. But at the same 
time the places of entertainment were p acked, and the cafes, caring nothing for the 
morrow, were producing their last bottles of liquor. A noisy concourse surged round 
every bar, including loving couples who fondled each other without a thought for appearances. All were laughing or shouting. The reserves of emotion pent up during 
those many months when for everybody th e flame of life burned low were being 
recklessly squandered to celebrate this, the re d-letter day of their survival. Tomorrow real 
life would begin again, with its restrictions. But for the mome nt people in very different 
walks of life were rubbing shoulders, fraternizing. The leveling-out that death's imminence had failed in practice to accomplish wa s realized at last, for a few gay hours, 
in the rapture of escape.  But this rather tawdry exuberance was only one aspect of the town that day; not a 
few of those filling the streets at sundown, among them Rambert and his wife, hid under 
an air of calm satisfaction subtler forms of happiness. Many couples, indeed, and many 
families, looked like people out for a casual stroll, no more than that; in reality most of them were making sentimental pilgrimages to places where they had gone to school with suffering. The newcomers were being shown th e striking or obscurer tokens of the 
plague, relics of its passage. In some cases th e survivor merely played the part of guide, 
the eyewitness who has "been through it," and talked freely of  the danger without 
mentioning his fear. These were the milder forms of pleasure, little more than recreation. In other cases, however, there was more emoti on to these walks about the town, as when 
a man, pointing to some place charged for him with sad yet tender associations, would 
say to the girl or woman beside him: "This is  where, one evening ju st like this, I longed 
for you so desperately, and you weren't there!" These passionate pilgrims could readily 
be distinguished; they formed oases of whispers, aloof, self-centered, in the turbulence of 
the crowd. Far more effectively than the ba nds playing in the squares they vouched for 
the vast joy of liberation. These ecstatic couples, locked together, hardly speaking, 
proclaimed in the midst of the tumult of re joicing, with the proud e goism and injustice of 
happy people, that the plague was over, the re ign of terror ended. Calmly they denied, in 
the teeth of the evidence, that we had ever known a crazy world in which men were killed off like flies, or that precise savagery, that calculated frenzy of the plague, which instilled an odious freedom as to all that was not the here and now; or those charnel-house stenches which stupefied whom they did not kill . In short, they denied that we had ever 
been that hag-ridden populace a part of which was daily fed into a furnace and went up in oily fumes, while the rest, in shackled impotence, waited their turn.  That, anyhow, was what seemed evident to Rieux when towards the close of the afternoon, on his way to the outsk irts of the town, he walked alone in an uproar of bells, 
guns, bands, and deafening shouts. There was no question of his taki ng a day off; sick 
men have no holidays. Through the cool, clear light bathing the town rose the familiar smells of roasting meat and anise-flavored  liquor. All around him happy faces were 
turned toward the shining sky, men and women with flushed cheeks embraced one another with low, tense cries of desire. Yes, the plague had ended with the terror, and those passionately straining arms told what  it had meant: exile and deprivation in the 
profoundest meaning of the words.  For the first time Rieux found that he c ould give a name to the family likeness 
that for several months he had detected in the faces in the streets. He had only to look 
around him now. At the end of the plague, with  its misery and privations, these men and 
women had come to wear the aspect of the part they had been playing for so long, the 
part of emigrants whose faces fi rst, and now their clothes, told of long banishment from a 
distant homeland. Once plague ha d shut the gates of the town, they had settled down to a 
life of separation, debarred from the living wa rmth that gives forgetfulness of all. In 
different degrees, in every part of the to wn, men and women had been yearning for a 
reunion, not of the same kind for all, but for all alike ruled out. Most  of them had longed 
intensely for an absent one, for the warmth of a body, for love, or merely for a life that 
habit had endeared. Some, ofte n without knowing it, suffered from being deprived of the 
company of friends and from their inability to get in touch with them through the usual 
channels of friendship, letters , trains, and boats. Others, fewer these, Tarrou may have 
been one of them, had desired reunion with something they  couldn't have defined, but 
which seemed to them the only desirable thi ng on earth. For want of a better name, they 
sometimes called it peace.  Rieux walked on. As he progressed, the cr owds grew thicker, the din multiplied, 
and he had a feeling that his destination was receding as he advanced. Gradually he found 
himself drawn into the seething, clamorous mass and understanding more and more the cry that went up from it, a cry that, for some pa rt at least, was his. Yes, they had suffered 
together, in body no less than in soul, from a cruel leisure, exile w ithout redress, thirst 
that was never slaked. Among the heaps of corpses, the clanging bells of ambulances, the warnings of what goes by the name of fate, among unremitting waves of fear and agonized revolt, the horror that  such things could be, always a great voice had been 
ringing in the ears of these forlorn, panicked people, a voice calling them back to the land 
of their desire, a homeland. 
 It lay outside the walls of the stifled, st rangled town, in the fragrant brushwood of 
the hills, in the waves of the sea, under free skies, and in the custody of love. And it was 
to this, their lost home, toward happiness, they longed to retur n, turning their backs 
disgustedly on all else. 
 As to what that exile and that longing  for reunion meant, Rieux had no idea. But 
as he walked ahead, jostled on all sides, accosted now and then, and gradually made his way into less crowded streets, he was thinki ng it has no importance whether such things 
have or have not a meaning; all we need consider is the answer  given to men's hope. 
 Henceforth he knew the answer, and he  perceived it better now he was in the 
outskirts of the town, in almost empty street s. Those who, clinging to  their little own, had 
set their hearts solely on returning to the home of their love had sometimes their reward, though some of them were still walking th e streets alone, without the one they had 
awaited. Then, again, those we re happy who had not suffered a twofold separation, like 
some of us who, in the days before the epid emic, had failed to build their love on a solid 
basis at the outset, and had spent years blindl y groping for the pact, so slow and hard to 
come by, that in the long run binds together ill-assorted lovers. Such people had had, like 
Rieux himself, the rashness of counting overmuch on time; and now they were parted forever. But others, like Rambert, to whom  the doctor had said early that morning: 
"Courage! It's up to you now to prove you're  right", had, without faltering, welcomed 
back the loved one who they thought was lost to them. And for some time, anyhow, they would be happy. They knew now that if there is one thing one can always yearn for and 
sometimes attain, it is human love. But for those others who aspired beyond and above 
the human individual toward something they could not even imagin e, there had been no 
answer. Tarrou might seem to have won th rough to that hardly-come-by peace of which 
he used to speak; but he had found it only in de ath, too late to turn it to account. If others, 
however, Rieux could see them in the door ways of houses, passionately embracing and 
gazing hungrily at one another in the failing sunset glow, had got what they wanted, this was because they had asked for the one thing that depended on them solely. And as he turned the corner of the street where Gra nd and Cottard lived, Rieux was thinking it was 
only right that those whose desi res are limited to man and his humble yet formidable love 
should enter, if only now and then, into their reward.   THIS chronicle is drawing to an end, and th is seems to be the moment for Dr. Bernard 
Rieux to confess that he is the narrator. But before describing the closing scenes, he 
would wish anyhow to justify his undertaking an d to set it down that he expressly made a 
point of adopting the tone of an impartial obs erver. His profession put him in touch with 
a great many of our townspeople while pl ague was raging, and he had opportunities of 
hearing their various opinions. Thus he was well placed for givi ng a true account of all he 
saw and heard. But in so doing he has tried to keep within the limits that seemed 
desirable. For instance, in a general way he has confined himself to describing only such 
things as he was enabled to see for himself, and has refrained from attributing to his fellow sufferers thoughts that, when all is sa id and done, they were not bound to have. 
 And as for documents, he has used only such as chance, or mischance, put in his way.  Summoned to give evidence regarding what was a sort of crime, he has exercised 
the restraint that behooves a conscientious witn ess. All the same, follo wing the dictates of 
his heart, he has deliberately taken the vict ims' side and tried to share with his fellow 
citizens the only certitudes they had in comm on, love, exile, and suffering. Thus he can 
truly say there was not one of their anxieties in  which he did not share, no predicament of 
theirs that was not his. 
 To be an honest witness, it was for him to confine himself mainly to what people 
did or said and what could be gleaned fr om documents. Regarding his personal troubles 
and his long suspense, his duty was to hold his peace. When now and then he refers to such matters, it is only for the light they ma y throw on his fellow citizens and in order to 
give a picture, as well defined as possible, of  what most of the time they felt confusedly. 
Actually, this self-imposed reticence cost hi m little effort. Whenever tempted to add his 
personal note to the myriad voices of the pl ague-stricken, he was de terred by the thought 
that not one of his sufferings but was common to all the others  and that in a world where 
sorrow is so often lonely, this was an adva ntage. Thus, decidedly, it was up to him to 
speak for all.  But there was at least one of our townsfolk for whom Dr. Rieux could not speak, the man of whom Tarrou said one day to Rieux: "His only real crime is that of having in 
his heart approved of something that k illed off men, women, and children. I can 
understand the rest, but for that I am obliged to pardon him."  It is fitting that this chronicle should end with some  reference to that man, who 
had an ignorant, that is to say lonely, heart. 
 On turning out of the main thoroughfares where the rejoicings were in full swing, 
and entering the street where Grand and Co ttard lived, Dr. Rieux was held up by a police 
cordon. Nothing could have surprised him more. This quiet part of the town seemed all 
the quieter for the sounds of festivity in th e distance, and the doctor pictured it as 
deserted as it was tranquil.  "Sorry, doctor," a policeman said, "but  I can't let you through. There's a crazy 
fellow with a gun, shooting at everybody. Bu t you'd better stay; we may need you." 
 Just then Rieux saw Grand coming towa rd him. Grand, too, had no idea what was 
happening and the police had stopped him, too. He had been told that the shots came from the house where he lived. They could s ee, some way down the street, the front of 
the house, bathed in cool evening light. Fart her down the street was another line of 
policemen like the one that had prevented Rieux and Grand from advancing, and behind 
the line some of the local residents could be seen crossing and recrossing the street 
hastily. The street immediately in front of the house was quite empty and in the middle of the hollow square lay a hat and a piece of di rty cloth. Looking more carefully, they saw 
more policemen, revolver in hand, shelteri ng in doorways facing the house. All the 
shutters in Grand's house were closed, except one on the third floor that seemed to be 
hanging loose on one hinge only. Not a sound could be heard in the street but for occasional snatches of music comi ng from the center of the town. 
 Suddenly two revolver-shots rang out; th ey came from one of the buildings 
opposite and some splinters flew off the dismantled shutter. Then silence came again. Seen from a distance, after the tumult of the day, the whole business seemed to Rieux 
fantastically unreal, like something in a dream. 
 "That's Cottard's window," Grand suddenly exclaimed. "I can't make it out. I 
thought he'd disappeared." 
 "Why are they shooting?" Rieux asked the policeman.  "Oh, just to keep him busy. We're waiting for a car to come with the stuff that's 
needed. He fires at anyone who tries to get in by the front door. He got one of our men 
just now."  "But why did he fire?"  "Ask me another! Some folks were having f un in the street, and he let off at them. 
They couldn't make it out at first. When he fired again, they started yelling, one man was 
wounded, and the rest took to their heels. So me fellow out of his head, I should say." 
 The minutes seemed interminable in the silence that had returned. Then they noticed a dog, the first dog Ri eux had seen for many months, emerging on the other side 
of the street, a draggled-looking spaniel that its owners had, pr esumably, kept in hiding. It 
ambled along the wall, stopped in the doorway, sat down, and began to dig at its fleas. 
Some of the policemen whistled for it to come away.  It raised its head, then walked out into the road and was sniffi ng at the hat when a 
revolver barked from the third-floor window. The dog did a somersault like a tossed pancake, lashed the air with its legs, and floundered on to its side , its body writhing in 
long convulsions. As if by way of reprisal  five or six shots from the opposite house 
knocked more splinters off the shutter. Then silence fell again. The sun had moved a little and the shadow-line was nearing Cottard's window. There was a low squeal of brakes in 
the street, behind the doctor.  "Here they are," the policeman said.  A number of police officers jumped out of the car and unloaded coils of rope, a ladder, and two big oblong packages wrapped in oilcloth. Then they turned into a street 
behind the row of houses facing Grand's. A mi nute or so later there were signs of 
movement, though little could be see n, in the doorways of the houses. 
 Then came a short spell of waiting. The dog had ceased moving; it now was lying 
in a small, dark, glistening pool.  Suddenly from the window of one of th e houses that the police officers had 
entered from behind there came a burst of machine-gun fire. They were still aiming at the shutter, which literally shredded itself awa y, disclosing a dark gap into which neither 
Grand nor Rieux could see from where they  stood. When the first machine-gun stopped 
firing, another opened up from a different angl e, in a house a little farther up the street. 
The shots were evidently directed into the window space, and a fragment of the brickwork clattered down upon the pavement.  At the same moment three police officer s charged across the road and disappeared 
into the doorway. The machine-gun ceased fire . Then came another wait. Two muffled 
detonations sounded inside the house, followed by a confused hubbub growing steadily louder until they saw a small man in his shirt- sleeves, screaming at the top of his voice, 
being carried more than dragged out by the doorway. 
 As if at an expected signal all the shutte rs in the street flew open and excited faces 
lined the windows, while people streamed out  of the houses and jo stled the lines of 
police. Rieux had a brief glimpse of the sma ll man, on his feet now, in the middle of the 
road, his arms pinioned behind him by two po lice officers. He was still screaming. A 
policeman went up and dealt him two hard blows with his fists, quite calmly, with a sort 
of conscientious thoroughness.  "It's Cottard!" Grand's voice was shrill with excitement. "He's gone mad!"  Cottard had fallen backwards, and the policeman launched a vigorous kick into 
the crumpled mass sprawling on the ground. Then  a small, surging group began to move 
toward the doctor and his old friend.  "Stand clear!" the policeman bawled.  Rieux looked away when the group, Co ttard and his captors, passed him. 
 The dusk was thickening into night when  Grand and the doctor made a move at 
last. The Cottard incident seemed to have shaken the neighborhood out of its normal lethargy and even these remote streets were  becoming crowded with noisy merry-makers. 
On his doorstep Grand bade the doctor good nigh t; he was going to put in an evening's 
work, he said. Just as he was starting up the stairs he added that he'd written to Jeanne 
and was feeling much happier. Also he'd made a fresh start with his phrase. "I've cut out 
all the adjectives."  And, with a twinkle in his eye, he took his hat off, bringing it low in a courtly sweep. But Rieux was thinking of Cottard, and the dull thud of fists belaboring the 
wretched man's face haunted him as he went to visit his old asthma patient. Perhaps it was more painful to think of a guilty man than of a dead man.  It was quite dark by the time he reached  his patient's house. In the bedroom the 
distant clamor of a populace rejoicing in its ne w-won freedom could be faintly heard, and 
the old fellow was as usual transposing peas from one pan to another. 
 "They're quite right to amuse themselves,"  he said. "It takes all sorts to make a 
world, as they say. And your colleague, doctor, how's he getting on?"  "He's dead." Rieux was listening to his patient's rumbling chest. 
 "Ah, really?" The old fellow sounded embarrassed.  "Of plague," Rieux added.  "Yes," the old man said after a moment's  silence, "it's always the best who go. 
 That's how life is. But he was a man who knew what he wanted." 
 "Why do you say that?" The doctor was putting back his stethoscope. 
 "Oh, for no particular reason. Only, well, he never talked just for talking's sake. I'd rather cottoned to him. But there you are! All those folks are saying: 
 'It was plague. We've had the plague here.' You'd almost think they expected to be given medals for it. But what does that mean, 'plague'? Just life, no more than that."  "Do your inhalations regularly."  "Don't worry about me, doctor! There's lots of life in me yet, and I'll see 'em all 
into their graves. I know how to live."  A burst of joyful shouts in the distance seemed an echo of his boast. Halfway across the room the doctor halted.  "Would you mind if I go up on the terrace?"  "Of course not. You'd like to have a look at 'em, that it? But they're just the same as ever, really." When Rieux was leaving the room, a new thought crossed his mind. "I say, doctor. Is it a fact they're going to put  up a memorial to the people who died of 
plague?"  "So the papers say. A monument, or just a tablet." 
 "I could have sworn it! And there'll be speeches." He chuckled throatily. "I can 
almost hear them saying: 'Our dear depart ed...' And then they'll go off and have a good 
snack."  Rieux was already halfway up the stai rs. Cold, fathomless depths of sky 
glimmered overhead, and near the hilltops stars shone hard as flint. It was much like the 
night when he and Tarrou had come to  the terrace to forget the plague. 
 Only, tonight the sea was breaking on the cliffs more loudly and the air was calm 
and limpid, free of the tang of brine the autu mn wind had brought. The noises of the town 
were still beating like waves at the foot of the long line of te rraces, but tonight they told 
not of revolt, but of deliveran ce. In the distance a reddish glow hung above the big central 
streets and squares. In this night of new- born freedom desires knew no limits, and it was 
their clamor that reached Rieux's ears.  From the dark harbor soared the first ro cket of the firework display organized by 
the municipality, and the town acclaimed it w ith a long-drawn sigh of delight. Cottard. 
 Tarrou, the men and the woman Rieux had l oved and lost, all alike, dead or guilty, 
were forgotten. Yes, the old fellow had been right; these people were "just the same as ever." But this was at once their strength and their innocence, and it was on this level, 
beyond all grief, that Rieux could feel himsel f at one with them. And it was in the midst 
of shouts rolling against th e terrace wall in massive wave s that waxed in volume and 
duration, while cataracts of colored fire fell thicker through the dar kness, that Dr. Rieux resolved to compile this chronicle, so that he should not be one of those who hold their 
peace but should bear witness in favor of t hose plague-stricken people; so that some 
memorial of the injustice and outrage done th em might endure; and to state quite simply 
what we learn in a time of pestilence: that th ere are more things to admire in men than to 
despise. 
 None the less, he knew that the tale he had to tell could not be one of a final 
victory. It could be only the record of what had had to be done, and what assuredly would have to be done again in the never ending fight agains t terror and its relentless 
onslaughts, despite their personal afflictions, by all who, while unable to be saints but 
refusing to bow down to pestilences, st rive their utmost to be healers. 
 And, indeed, as he listened to the cries of joy rising from the town, Rieux remembered that such joy is always imperile d. He knew what those jubilant crowds did 
not know but could have learned from books: th at the plague bacillus never dies or 
disappears for good; that it can lie dormant fo r years and years in furniture and linen-
chests; that it bides its time in bedroo ms, cellars, trunks, and bookshelves; and that 
perhaps the day would come when, for the bane and the enlighten ing of men, it would 
rouse up its rats again and send them forth to die in a happy city.    The End   
